[The Ball and The Cross by G.K. Chesterton 1909]I.
A DISCUSSION SOMEWHAT IN THE AIRThe flying ship of Professor Lucifer sang through the skies likea silver arrow; the bleak white steel of it, gleaming in thebleak blue emptiness of the evening.
That it was far above theearth was no expression for it; to the two men in it, it seemedto be far above the stars.
The professor had himself inventedthe flying machine, and had also invented nearly everything init.
Every sort of tool or apparatus had, in consequence, to thefull, that fantastic and distorted look which belongs to themiracles of science.
For the world of science and evolution isfar more nameless and elusive and like a dream than the world ofpoetry and religion; since in the latter images and ideas remainthemselves eternally, while it is the whole idea of evolutionthat identities melt into each other as they do in a nightmare.
All the tools of Professor Lucifer were the ancient human toolsgone mad, grown into unrecognizable shapes, forgetful of theirorigin, forgetful of their names.
That thing which looked like anenormous key with three wheels was really a patent and verydeadly revolver.
That object which seemed to be created by theentanglement of two corkscrews was really the key.
The thingwhich might have been mistaken for a tricycle turned upside-downwas the inexpressibly important instrument to which the corkscrewwas the key.
All these things, as I say, the professor hadinvented; he had invented everything in the flying ship, with theexception, perhaps, of himself.
This he had been born too lateactually to inaugurate, but he believed at least, that he hadconsiderably improved it.
There was, however, another man on board, so to speak, at thetime.
Him, also, by a curious coincidence, the professor had notinvented, and him he had not even very greatly improved, thoughhe had fished him up with a lasso out of his own back garden, inWestern Bulgaria, with the pure object of improving him.
He wasan exceedingly holy man, almost entirely covered with white hair.
You could see nothing but his eyes, and he seemed to talk withthem.
A monk of immense learning and acute intellect he had madehimself happy in a little stone hut and a little stony garden inthe Balkans, chiefly by writing the most crushing refutations ofexposures of certain heresies, the last professors of which hadbeen burnt (generally by each other) precisely 1,119 yearspreviously.
They were really very plausible and thoughtfulheresies, and it was really a creditable or even gloriouscircumstance, that the old monk had been intellectual enough todetect their fallacy; the only misfortune was that nobody in themodern world was intellectual enough even to understand theirargument.
The old monk, one of whose names was Michael, and theother a name quite impossible to remember or repeat in ourWestern civilization, had, however, as I have said, made himselfquite happy while he was in a mountain hermitage in the societyof wild animals.
And now that his luck had lifted him above allthe mountains in the society of a wild physicist, he made himselfhappy still.
"I have no intention, my good Michael," said Professor Lucifer,"of endeavouring to convert you by argument.
The imbecility ofyour traditions can be quite finally exhibited to anybody withmere ordinary knowledge of the world, the same kind of knowledgewhich teaches us not to sit in draughts or not to encouragefriendliness in impecunious people.
It is folly to talk of thisor that demonstrating the rationalist philosophy.
Everythingdemonstrates it.
Rubbing shoulders with men of all kinds----""You will forgive me," said the monk, meekly from under loads ofwhite beard, "but I fear I do not understand; was it in orderthat I might rub my shoulder against men of all kinds that youput me inside this thing?"
"An entertaining retort, in the narrow and deductive manner ofthe Middle Ages," replied the Professor, calmly, "but even uponyour own basis I will illustrate my point.
We are up in the sky.
In your religion and all the religions, as far as I know (and Iknow everything), the sky is made the symbol of everything thatis sacred and merciful.
Well, now you are in the sky, you knowbetter.
Phrase it how you like, twist it how you like, you knowthat you know better.
You know what are a man's real feelingsabout the heavens, when he finds himself alone in the heavens,surrounded by the heavens.
You know the truth, and the truth isthis.
The heavens are evil, the sky is evil, the stars are evil.
This mere space, this mere quantity, terrifies a man more thantigers or the terrible plague.
You know that since our sciencehas spoken, the bottom has fallen out of the Universe.
Now,heaven is the hopeless thing, more hopeless than any hell.
Now,if there be any comfort for all your miserable progeny of morbidapes, it must be in the earth, underneath you, under the roots ofthe grass, in the place where hell was of old.
The fiery crypts,the lurid cellars of the underworld, to which you once condemnedthe wicked, are hideous enough, but at least they are more homelythan the heaven in which we ride.
And the time will come when youwill all hide in them, to escape the horror of the stars."
"I hope you will excuse my interrupting you," said Michael, witha slight cough, "but I have always noticed----""Go on, pray go on," said Professor Lucifer, radiantly, "I reallylike to draw out your simple ideas."
"Well, the fact is," said the other, "that much as I admire yourrhetoric and the rhetoric of your school, from a purely verbalpoint of view, such little study of you and your school in humanhistory as I have been enabled to make has led me to--er--rathersingular conclusion, which I find great difficulty in expressing,especially in a foreign language."
"Come, come," said the Professor, encouragingly, "I'll help youout.
How did my view strike you?"
"Well, the truth is, I know I don't express it properly, butsomehow it seemed to me that you always convey ideas of that kindwith most eloquence, when--er--when----""Oh!
get on," cried Lucifer, boisterously.
"Well, in point of fact when your flying ship is just going torun into something.
I thought you wouldn't mind my mentioning it,but it's running into something now."
Lucifer exploded with an oath and leapt erect, leaning hard uponthe handle that acted as a helm to the vessel.
For the last tenminutes they had been shooting downwards into great cracks andcaverns of cloud.
Now, through a sort of purple haze, could beseen comparatively near to them what seemed to be the upper partof a huge, dark orb or sphere, islanded in a sea of cloud.
TheProfessor's eyes were blazing like a maniac's.
"It is a new world," he cried, with a dreadful mirth.
"It is anew planet and it shall bear my name.
This star and not thatother vulgar one shall be 'Lucifer, sun of the morning.'
Here wewill have no chartered lunacies, here we will have no gods.
Hereman shall be as innocent as the daisies, as innocent and ascruel--here the intellect----""There seems," said Michael, timidly, "to be something stickingup in the middle of it."
"So there is," said the Professor, leaning over the side of theship, his spectacles shining with intellectual excitement.
"Whatcan it be?
It might of course be merely a----"Then a shriek indescribable broke out of him of a sudden, and heflung up his arms like a lost spirit.
The monk took the helm in atired way; he did not seem much astonished for he came from anignorant part of the world in which it is not uncommon for lostspirits to shriek when they see the curious shape which theProfessor had just seen on the top of the mysterious ball, but hetook the helm only just in time, and by driving it hard to theleft he prevented the flying ship from smashing into St. Paul'sCathedral.
A plain of sad-coloured cloud lay along the level of the top ofthe Cathedral dome, so that the ball and the cross looked like abuoy riding on a leaden sea.
As the flying ship swept towards it,this plain of cloud looked as dry and definite and rocky as anygrey desert.
Hence it gave to the mind and body a sharp andunearthly sensation when the ship cut and sank into the cloud asinto any common mist, a thing without resistance.
There was, asit were, a deadly shock in the fact that there was no shock.
Itwas as if they had cloven into ancient cliffs like so muchbutter.
But sensations awaited them which were much stranger thanthose of sinking through the solid earth.
For a moment their eyesand nostrils were stopped with darkness and opaque cloud; thenthe darkness warmed into a kind of brown fog.
And far, far belowthem the brown fog fell until it warmed into fire.
Through thedense London atmosphere they could see below them the flamingLondon lights; lights which lay beneath them in squares andoblongs of fire.
The fog and fire were mixed in a passionatevapour; you might say that the fog was drowning the flames; oryou might say that the flames had set the fog on fire.
Beside theship and beneath it (for it swung just under the ball), theimmeasurable dome itself shot out and down into the dark like acombination of voiceless cataracts.
Or it was like some cyclopeansea-beast sitting above London and letting down its tentaclesbewilderingly on every side, a monstrosity in that starlessheaven.
For the clouds that belonged to London had closed overthe heads of the voyagers sealing up the entrance of the upperair.
They had broken through a roof and come into a temple oftwilight.
They were so near to the ball that Lucifer leaned his handagainst it, holding the vessel away, as men push a boat off froma bank.
Above it the cross already draped in the dark mists ofthe borderland was shadowy and more awful in shape and size.
Professor Lucifer slapped his hand twice upon the surface of thegreat orb as if he were caressing some enormous animal.
"This isthe fellow," he said, "this is the one for my money."
"May I with all respect inquire," asked the old monk, "what onearth you are talking about?"
"Why this," cried Lucifer, smiting the ball again, "here is theonly symbol, my boy.
So fat.
So satisfied.
Not like that scraggyindividual, stretching his arms in stark weariness."
And hepointed up to the cross, his face dark with a grin.
"I wastelling you just now, Michael, that I can prove the best part ofthe rationalist case and the Christian humbug from any symbol youliked to give me, from any instance I came across.
Here is aninstance with a vengeance.
What could possibly express yourphilosophy and my philosophy better than the shape of that crossand the shape of this ball?
This globe is reasonable; that crossis unreasonable.
It is a four-legged animal, with one leg longerthan the others.
The globe is inevitable.
The cross is arbitrary.
Above all the globe is at unity with itself; the cross isprimarily and above all things at enmity with itself.
The crossis the conflict of two hostile lines, of irreconcilabledirection.
That silent thing up there is essentially a collision,a crash, a struggle in stone.
Pah!
that sacred symbol of yourshas actually given its name to a description of desperation andmuddle.
When we speak of men at once ignorant of each other andfrustrated by each other, we say they are at cross-purposes.
Awaywith the thing!
The very shape of it is a contradiction interms."
"What you say is perfectly true," said Michael, with serenity.
"But we like contradictions in terms.
Man is a contradiction interms; he is a beast whose superiority to other beasts consistsin having fallen.
That cross is, as you say, an eternalcollision; so am I.
That is a struggle in stone.
Every form oflife is a struggle in flesh.
The shape of the cross isirrational, just as the shape of the human animal is irrational.
You say the cross is a quadruped with one limb longer than therest.
I say man is a quadruped who only uses two of his legs."
The Professor frowned thoughtfully for an instant, and said: "Ofcourse everything is relative, and I would not deny that theelement of struggle and self-contradiction, represented by thatcross, has a necessary place at a certain evolutionary stage.
But surely the cross is the lower development and the sphere thehigher.
After all it is easy enough to see what is really wrongwith Wren's architectural arrangement."
"And what is that, pray?"
inquired Michael, meekly.
"The cross is on top of the ball," said Professor Lucifer,simply.
"That is surely wrong.
The ball should be on top of thecross.
The cross is a mere barbaric prop; the ball is perfection.
The cross at its best is but the bitter tree of man's history;the ball is the rounded, the ripe and final fruit.
And the fruitshould be at the top of the tree, not at the bottom of it."
"Oh!"
said the monk, a wrinkle coming into his forehead, "so youthink that in a rationalistic scheme of symbolism the ball shouldbe on top of the cross?"
"It sums up my whole allegory," said the professor.
"Well, that is really very interesting," resumed Michael slowly,"because I think in that case you would see a most singulareffect, an effect that has generally been achieved by all thoseable and powerful systems which rationalism, or the religion ofthe ball, has produced to lead or teach mankind.
You would see, Ithink, that thing happen which is always the ultimate embodimentand logical outcome of your logical scheme."
"What are you talking about?"
asked Lucifer.
"What would happen?"
"I mean it would fall down," said the monk, looking wistfullyinto the void.
Lucifer made an angry movement and opened his mouth to speak, butMichael, with all his air of deliberation, was proceeding beforehe could bring out a word.
"I once knew a man like you, Lucifer," he said, with a maddeningmonotony and slowness of articulation.
"He took this----""There is no man like me," cried Lucifer, with a violence thatshook the ship.
"As I was observing," continued Michael, "this man also took theview that the symbol of Christianity was a symbol of savagery andall unreason.
His history is rather amusing.
It is also a perfectallegory of what happens to rationalists like yourself.
He began,of course, by refusing to allow a crucifix in his house, or roundhis wife's neck, or even in a picture.
He said, as you say, thatit was an arbitrary and fantastic shape, that it was amonstrosity, loved because it was paradoxical.
Then he began togrow fiercer and more eccentric; he would batter the crosses bythe roadside; for he lived in a Roman Catholic country.
Finallyin a height of frenzy he climbed the steeple of the Parish Churchand tore down the cross, waving it in the air, and uttering wildsoliloquies up there under the stars.
Then one still summerevening as he was wending his way homewards, along a lane, thedevil of his madness came upon him with a violence andtransfiguration which changes the world.
He was standing smoking,for a moment, in the front of an interminable line of palings,when his eyes were opened.
Not a light shifted, not a leafstirred, but he saw as if by a sudden change in the eyesight thatthis paling was an army of innumerable crosses linked togetherover hill and dale.
And he whirled up his heavy stick and went atit as if at an army.
Mile after mile along his homeward path hebroke it down and tore it up.
For he hated the cross and everypaling is a wall of crosses.
When he returned to his house he wasa literal madman.
He sat upon a chair and then started up from itfor the cross-bars of the carpentry repeated the intolerableimage.
He flung himself upon a bed only to remember that this,too, like all workmanlike things, was constructed on the accursedplan.
He broke his furniture because it was made of crosses.
Heburnt his house because it was made of crosses.
He was found inthe river."
Lucifer was looking at him with a bitten lip.
"Is that story really true?"
he asked.
"Oh, no," said Michael, airily.
"It is a parable.
It is a parableof you and all your rationalists.
You begin by breaking up theCross; but you end by breaking up the habitable world.
We leaveyou saying that nobody ought to join the Church against his will.
When we meet you again you are saying that no one has any will tojoin it with.
We leave you saying that there is no such place asEden.
We find you saying that there is no such place as Ireland.
You start by hating the irrational and you come to hateeverything, for everything is irrational and so----"Lucifer leapt upon him with a cry like a wild beast's.
"Ah," hescreamed, "to every man his madness.
You are mad on the cross.
Let it save you."
And with a herculean energy he forced the monk backwards out ofthe reeling car on to the upper part of the stone ball.
Michael,with as abrupt an agility, caught one of the beams of the crossand saved himself from falling.
At the same instant Lucifer drovedown a lever and the ship shot up with him in it alone.
"Ha!
ha!"
he yelled, "what sort of a support do you find it, oldfellow?"
"For practical purposes of support," replied Michael grimly, "itis at any rate a great deal better than the ball.
May I ask ifyou are going to leave me here?"
"Yes, yes.
I mount!
I mount!"
cried the professor in ungovernableexcitement.
"_Altiora peto_.
My path is upward."
"How often have you told me, Professor, that there is really noup or down in space?"
said the monk.
"I shall mount up as much asyou will."
"Indeed," said Lucifer, leering over the side of the flying ship.
"May I ask what you are going to do?"
The monk pointed downward at Ludgate Hill.
"I am going," he said,"to climb up into a star."
Those who look at the matter most superficially regard paradox assomething which belongs to jesting and light journalism.
Paradoxof this kind is to be found in the saying of the dandy, in thedecadent comedy, "Life is much too important to be takenseriously."
Those who look at the matter a little more deeply ordelicately see that paradox is a thing which especially belongsto all religions.
Paradox of this kind is to be found in such asaying as "The meek shall inherit the earth."
But those who seeand feel the fundamental fact of the matter know that paradox isa thing which belongs not to religion only, but to all vivid andviolent practical crises of human living.
This kind of paradoxmay be clearly perceived by anybody who happens to be hanging inmid-space, clinging to one arm of the Cross of St. Paul's.
Father Michael in spite of his years, and in spite of hisasceticism (or because of it, for all I know), was a very healthyand happy old gentleman.
And as he swung on a bar above thesickening emptiness of air, he realized, with that sort of deaddetachment which belongs to the brains of those in peril, thedeathless and hopeless contradiction which is involved in themere idea of courage.
He was a happy and healthy old gentlemanand therefore he was quite careless about it.
And he felt asevery man feels in the taut moment of such terror that his chiefdanger was terror itself; his only possible strength would be acoolness amounting to carelessness, a carelessness amountingalmost to a suicidal swagger.
His one wild chance of coming outsafely would be in not too desperately desiring to be safe.
Theremight be footholds down that awful facade, if only he could notcare whether they were footholds or no.
If he were foolhardy hemight escape; if he were wise he would stop where he was till hedropped from the cross like a stone.
And this antinomy kept onrepeating itself in his mind, a contradiction as large andstaring as the immense contradiction of the Cross; he rememberedhaving often heard the words, "Whosoever shall lose his life thesame shall save it."
He remembered with a sort of strange pitythat this had always been made to mean that whoever lost hisphysical life should save his spiritual life.
Now he knew thetruth that is known to all fighters, and hunters, and climbers ofcliffs.
He knew that even his animal life could only be saved bya considerable readiness to lose it.
Some will think it improbable that a human soul swingingdesperately in mid-air should think about philosophicalinconsistencies.
But such extreme states are dangerous things todogmatize about.
Frequently they produce a certain useless andjoyless activity of the mere intellect, thought not only divorcedfrom hope but even from desire.
And if it is impossible todogmatize about such states, it is still more impossible todescribe them.
To this spasm of sanity and clarity in Michael'smind succeeded a spasm of the elemental terror; the terror of theanimal in us which regards the whole universe as its enemy;which, when it is victorious, has no pity, and so, when it isdefeated has no imaginable hope.
Of that ten minutes of terror itis not possible to speak in human words.
But then again in thatdamnable darkness there began to grow a strange dawn as of greyand pale silver.
And of this ultimate resignation or certainty itis even less possible to write; it is something stranger thanhell itself; it is perhaps the last of the secrets of God.
At thehighest crisis of some incurable anguish there will suddenly fallupon the man the stillness of an insane contentment.
It is nothope, for hope is broken and romantic and concerned with thefuture; this is complete and of the present.
It is not faith, forfaith by its very nature is fierce, and as it were at oncedoubtful and defiant; but this is simply a satisfaction.
It isnot knowledge, for the intellect seems to have no particular partin it.
Nor is it (as the modern idiots would certainly say it is)a mere numbness or negative paralysis of the powers of grief.
Itis not negative in the least; it is as positive as good news.
Insome sense, indeed, it is good news.
It seems almost as if therewere some equality among things, some balance in all possiblecontingencies which we are not permitted to know lest we shouldlearn indifference to good and evil, but which is sometimes shownto us for an instant as a last aid in our last agony.
Michael certainly could not have given any sort of rationalaccount of this vast unmeaning satisfaction which soaked throughhim and filled him to the brim.
He felt with a sort ofhalf-witted lucidity that the cross was there, and the ball wasthere, and the dome was there, that he was going to climb downfrom them, and that he did not mind in the least whether he waskilled or not.
This mysterious mood lasted long enough to starthim on his dreadful descent and to force him to continue it.
Butsix times before he reached the highest of the outer galleriesterror had returned on him like a flying storm of darkness andthunder.
By the time he had reached that place of safety healmost felt (as in some impossible fit of drunkenness) that hehad two heads; one was calm, careless, and efficient; the othersaw the danger like a deadly map, was wise, careful, and useless.
He had fancied that he would have to let himself vertically downthe face of the whole building.
When he dropped into the uppergallery he still felt as far from the terrestrial globe as if hehad only dropped from the sun to the moon.
He paused a little,panting in the gallery under the ball, and idly kicked his heels,moving a few yards along it.
And as he did so a thunderboltstruck his soul.
A man, a heavy, ordinary man, with a composedindifferent face, and a prosaic sort of uniform, with a row ofbuttons, blocked his way.
Michael had no mind to wonder whetherthis solid astonished man, with the brown moustache and thenickel buttons, had also come on a flying ship.
He merely let hismind float in an endless felicity about the man.
He thought hownice it would be if he had to live up in that gallery with thatone man for ever.
He thought how he would luxuriate in thenameless shades of this man's soul and then hear with an endlessexcitement about the nameless shades of the souls of all hisaunts and uncles.
A moment before he had been dying alone.
Nowhe was living in the same world with a man; an inexhaustibleecstasy.
In the gallery below the ball Father Michael had foundthat man who is the noblest and most divine and most lovable ofall men, better than all the saints, greater than all theheroes--man Friday.
In the confused colour and music of his new paradise, Michaelheard only in a faint and distant fashion some remarks that thisbeautiful solid man seemed to be making to him; remarks aboutsomething or other being after hours and against orders.
He alsoseemed to be asking how Michael "got up" there.
This beautifulman evidently felt as Michael did that the earth was a star andwas set in heaven.
At length Michael sated himself with the mere sensual music ofthe voice of the man in buttons.
He began to listen to what hesaid, and even to make some attempt at answering a question whichappeared to have been put several times and was now put with someexcess of emphasis.
Michael realized that the image of God innickel buttons was asking him how he had come there.
He said thathe had come in Lucifer's ship.
On his giving this answer thedemeanour of the image of God underwent a remarkable change.
Fromaddressing Michael gruffly, as if he were a malefactor, he begansuddenly to speak to him with a sort of eager and feverishamiability as if he were a child.
He seemed particularly anxiousto coax him away from the balustrade.
He led him by the armtowards a door leading into the building itself, soothing him allthe time.
He gave what even Michael (slight as was his knowledgeof the world) felt to be an improbable account of the sumptuouspleasures and varied advantages awaiting him downstairs.
Michaelfollowed him, however, if only out of politeness, down anapparently interminable spiral of staircase.
At one point a dooropened.
Michael stepped through it, and the unaccountable man inbuttons leapt after him and pinioned him where he stood.
But heonly wished to stand; to stand and stare.
He had stepped as itwere into another infinity, out under the dome of another heaven.
But this was a dome of heaven made by man.
The gold and green andcrimson of its sunset were not in the shapeless clouds but inshapes of cherubim and seraphim, awful human shapes with apassionate plumage.
Its stars were not above but far below, likefallen stars still in unbroken constellations; the dome itselfwas full of darkness.
And far below, lower even than the lights,could be seen creeping or motionless, great black masses of men.
The tongue of a terrible organ seemed to shake the very air inthe whole void; and through it there came up to Michael the soundof a tongue more terrible; the dreadful everlasting voice of man,calling to his gods from the beginning to the end of the world.
Michael felt almost as if he were a god, and all the voices werehurled at him.
"No, the pretty things aren't here," said the demi-god inbuttons, caressingly.
"The pretty things are downstairs.
Youcome along with me.
There's something that will surprise youdownstairs; something you want very much to see."
Evidently the man in buttons did not feel like a god, so Michaelmade no attempt to explain his feelings to him, but followed himmeekly enough down the trail of the serpentine staircase.
He hadno notion where or at what level he was.
He was still full of thecold splendour of space, and of what a French writer hasbrilliantly named the "vertigo of the infinite," when anotherdoor opened, and with a shock indescribable he found himself onthe familiar level, in a street full of faces, with the housesand even the lamp-posts above his head.
He felt suddenly happyand suddenly indescribably small.
He fancied he had been changedinto a child again; his eyes sought the pavement seriously aschildren's do, as if it were a thing with which somethingsatisfactory could be done.
He felt the full warmth of thatpleasure from which the proud shut themselves out; the pleasurewhich not only goes with humiliation, but which almost ishumiliation.
Men who have escaped death by a hair have it, andmen whose love is returned by a woman unexpectedly, and men whosesins are forgiven them.
Everything his eye fell on it feasted on,not aesthetically, but with a plain, jolly appetite as of a boyeating buns.
He relished the squareness of the houses; he likedtheir clean angles as if he had just cut them with a knife.
Thelit squares of the shop windows excited him as the young areexcited by the lit stage of some promising pantomime.
Hehappened to see in one shop which projected with a bulgingbravery on to the pavement some square tins of potted meat, andit seemed like a hint of a hundred hilarious high teas in ahundred streets of the world.
He was, perhaps, the happiest ofall the children of men.
For in that unendurable instant when hehung, half slipping, to the ball of St. Paul's, the wholeuniverse had been destroyed and re-created.
Suddenly through all the din of the dark streets came a crash ofglass.
With that mysterious suddenness of the Cockney mob, a rushwas made in the right direction, a dingy office, next to the shopof the potted meat.
The pane of glass was lying in splintersabout the pavement.
And the police already had their hands on avery tall young man, with dark, lank hair and dark, dazed eyes,with a grey plaid over his shoulder, who had just smashed theshop window with a single blow of his stick.
"I'd do it again," said the young man, with a furious white face.
"Anybody would have done it.
Did you see what it said?
I swearI'd do it again."
Then his eyes encountered the monkish habit ofMichael, and he pulled off his grey tam-o'-shanter with thegesture of a Catholic.
"Father, did you see what they said?"
he cried, trembling.
"Didyou see what they dared to say?
I didn't understand it at first.
I read it half through before I broke the window."
Michael felt he knew not how.
The whole peace of the world waspent up painfully in his heart.
The new and childlike world whichhe had seen so suddenly, men had not seen at all.
Here they werestill at their old bewildering, pardonable, useless quarrels,with so much to be said on both sides, and so little that need besaid at all.
A fierce inspiration fell on him suddenly; he wouldstrike them where they stood with the love of God.
They shouldnot move till they saw their own sweet and startling existence.
They should not go from that place till they went home embracinglike brothers and shouting like men delivered.
From the Crossfrom which he had fallen fell the shadow of its fantastic mercy;and the first three words he spoke in a voice like a silvertrumpet, held men as still as stones.
Perhaps if he had spokenthere for an hour in his illumination he might have founded areligion on Ludgate Hill.
But the heavy hand of his guide fellsuddenly on his shoulder.
"This poor fellow is dotty," he said good-humouredly to thecrowd.
"I found him wandering in the Cathedral.
Says he came ina flying ship.
Is there a constable to spare to take care of him?"
There was a constable to spare.
Two other constables attended tothe tall young man in grey; a fourth concerned himself with theowner of the shop, who showed some tendency to be turbulent.
Theytook the tall young man away to a magistrate, whither we shallfollow him in an ensuing chapter.
And they took the happiest manin the world away to an asylum.
II.
THE RELIGION OF THE STIPENDIARY MAGISTRATEThe editorial office of _The Atheist_ had for some years pastbecome less and less prominently interesting as a feature ofLudgate Hill.
The paper was unsuited to the atmosphere.
It showedan interest in the Bible unknown in the district, and a knowledgeof that volume to which nobody else on Ludgate Hill could makeany conspicuous claim.
It was in vain that the editor of _TheAtheist_ filled his front window with fierce and final demands asto what Noah in the Ark did with the neck of the giraffe.
It wasin vain that he asked violently, as for the last time, how thestatement "God is Spirit" could be reconciled with the statement"The earth is His footstool."
It was in vain that he cried withan accusing energy that the Bishop of London was paid L12,000 ayear for pretending to believe that the whale swallowed Jonah.
Itwas in vain that he hung in conspicuous places the most thrillingscientific calculations about the width of the throat of a whale.
Was it nothing to them all they that passed by?
Did his suddenand splendid and truly sincere indignation never stir any of thepeople pouring down Ludgate Hill?
Never.
The little man whoedited _The Atheist_ would rush from his shop on starlit eveningsand shake his fist at St. Paul's in the passion of his holy warupon the holy place.
He might have spared his emotion.
The crossat the top of St. Paul's and _The Atheist_ shop at the foot of itwere alike remote from the world.
The shop and the Cross wereequally uplifted and alone in the empty heavens.
To the little man who edited _The Atheist_, a fiery littleScotchman, with fiery, red hair and beard, going by the name ofTurnbull, all this decline in public importance seemed not somuch sad or even mad, but merely bewildering and unaccountable.
He had said the worst thing that could be said; and it seemedaccepted and ignored like the ordinary second best of thepoliticians.
Every day his blasphemies looked more glaring, andevery day the dust lay thicker upon them.
It made him feel as ifhe were moving in a world of idiots.
He seemed among a race ofmen who smiled when told of their own death, or looked vacantlyat the Day of Judgement.
Year after year went by, and year afteryear the death of God in a shop in Ludgate became a less and lessimportant occurrence.
All the forward men of his age discouragedTurnbull.
The socialists said he was cursing priests when heshould be cursing capitalists.
The artists said that the soul wasmost spiritual, not when freed from religion, but when freed frommorality.
Year after year went by, and at least a man came by whotreated Mr. Turnbull's secularist shop with a real respect andseriousness.
He was a young man in a grey plaid, and he smashedthe window.
He was a young man, born in the Bay of Arisaig, opposite Rum andthe Isle of Skye.
His high, hawklike features and snaky blackhair bore the mark of that unknown historic thing which iscrudely called Celtic, but which is probably far older than theCelts, whoever they were.
He was in name and stock a Highlanderof the Macdonalds; but his family took, as was common in suchcases, the name of a subordinate sept as a surname, and for allthe purposes which could be answered in London, he called himselfEvan MacIan.
He had been brought up in some loneliness andseclusion as a strict Roman Catholic, in the midst of that littlewedge of Roman Catholics which is driven into the WesternHighlands.
And he had found his way as far as Fleet Street,seeking some half-promised employment, without having properlyrealized that there were in the world any people who were notRoman Catholics.
He had uncovered himself for a few momentsbefore the statue of Queen Anne, in front of St. Paul'sCathedral, under the firm impression that it was a figure of theVirgin Mary.
He was somewhat surprised at the lack of deferenceshown to the figure by the people bustling by.
He did notunderstand that their one essential historical principle, the onelaw truly graven on their hearts, was the great and comfortingstatement that Queen Anne is dead.
This faith was as fundamentalas his faith, that Our Lady was alive.
Any persons he had talkedto since he had touched the fringe of our fashion or civilizationhad been by a coincidence, sympathetic or hypocritical.
Or ifthey had spoken some established blasphemies, he had been unableto understand them merely owing to the preoccupied satisfactionof his mind.
On that fantastic fringe of the Gaelic land where he walked as aboy, the cliffs were as fantastic as the clouds.
Heaven seemed tohumble itself and come closer to the earth.
The common paths ofhis little village began to climb quite suddenly and seemedresolved to go to heaven.
The sky seemed to fall down towards thehills; the hills took hold upon the sky.
In the sumptuous sunsetof gold and purple and peacock green cloudlets and islets werethe same.
Evan lived like a man walking on a borderland, theborderland between this world and another.
Like so many men andnations who grow up with nature and the common things, heunderstood the supernatural before he understood the natural.
Hehad looked at dim angels standing knee-deep in the grass beforehe had looked at the grass.
He knew that Our Lady's robes wereblue before he knew the wild roses round her feet were red.
Thedeeper his memory plunged into the dark house of childhood thenearer and nearer he came to the things that cannot be named.
All through his life he thought of the daylight world as a sortof divine debris, the broken remainder of his first vision.
Theskies and mountains were the splendid off-scourings of anotherplace.
The stars were lost jewels of the Queen.
Our Lady hadgone and left the stars by accident.
His private tradition was equally wild and unworldly.
Hisgreat-grandfather had been cut down at Culloden, certain in hislast instant that God would restore the King.
His grandfather,then a boy of ten, had taken the terrible claymore from the handof the dead and hung it up in his house, burnishing it andsharpening it for sixty years, to be ready for the nextrebellion.
His father, the youngest son and the last left alive,had refused to attend on Queen Victoria in Scotland.
And Evanhimself had been of one piece with his progenitors; and was notdead with them, but alive in the twentieth century.
He was notin the least the pathetic Jacobite of whom we read, left behindby a final advance of all things.
He was, in his own fancy, aconspirator, fierce and up to date.
In the long, dark afternoonsof the Highland winter, he plotted and fumed in the dark.
Hedrew plans of the capture of London on the desolate sand ofArisaig.
When he came up to capture London, it was not with an army ofwhite cockades, but with a stick and a satchel.
London overawedhim a little, not because he thought it grand or even terrible,but because it bewildered him; it was not the Golden City or evenhell; it was Limbo.
He had one shock of sentiment, when he turnedthat wonderful corner of Fleet Street and saw St. Paul's sittingin the sky.
"Ah," he said, after a long pause, "that sort of thing was builtunder the Stuarts!"
Then with a sour grin he asked himself whatwas the corresponding monument of the Brunswicks and theProtestant Constitution.
After some warning, he selected asky-sign of some pill.
Half an hour afterwards his emotions left him with an emptiedmind on the same spot.
And it was in a mood of mere idleinvestigation that he happened to come to a standstill oppositethe office of _The Atheist_.
He did not see the word "atheist",or if he did, it is quite possible that he did not know themeaning of the word.
Even as it was, the document would not haveshocked even the innocent Highlander, but for the troublesome andquite unforeseen fact that the innocent Highlander read itstolidly to the end; a thing unknown among the most enthusiasticsubscribers to the paper, and calculated in any case to create anew situation.
With a smart journalistic instinct characteristic of all hisschool, the editor of _The Atheist_ had put first in his paperand most prominently in his window an article called "TheMesopotamian Mythology and its Effects on Syriac Folk Lore."
Mr.Evan MacIan began to read this quite idly, as he would have reada public statement beginning with a young girl dying in Brightonand ending with Bile Beans.
He received the very considerableamount of information accumulated by the author with that tiredclearness of the mind which children have on heavy summerafternoons--that tired clearness which leads them to go on askingquestions long after they have lost interest in the subject andare as bored as their nurse.
The streets were full of people andempty of adventures.
He might as well know about the gods ofMesopotamia as not; so he flattened his long, lean face againstthe dim bleak pane of the window and read all there was to readabout Mesopotamian gods.
He read how the Mesopotamians had a godnamed Sho (sometimes pronounced Ji), and that he was described asbeing very powerful, a striking similarity to some expressionsabout Jahveh, who is also described as having power.
Evan hadnever heard of Jahveh in his life, and imagining him to be someother Mesopotamian idol, read on with a dull curiosity.
He learntthat the name Sho, under its third form of Psa, occurs in anearly legend which describes how the deity, after the manner ofJupiter on so many occasions, seduced a Virgin and begat a hero.
This hero, whose name is not essential to our existence, was, itwas said, the chief hero and Saviour of the Mesopotamian ethicalscheme.
Then followed a paragraph giving other examples of suchheroes and Saviours being born of some profligate intercoursebetween God and mortal.
Then followed a paragraph--but Evan didnot understand it.
He read it again and then again.
Then he didunderstand it.
The glass fell in ringing fragments on to thepavement, and Evan sprang over the barrier into the shop,brandishing his stick.
"What is this?"
cried little Mr. Turnbull, starting up with hairaflame.
"How dare you break my window?"
"Because it was the quickest cut to you," cried Evan, stamping.
"Stand up and fight, you crapulous coward.
You dirty lunatic,stand up, will you?
Have you any weapons here?"
"Are you mad?"
asked Turnbull, glaring.
"Are you?"
cried Evan.
"Can you be anything else when you plasteryour own house with that God-defying filth?
Stand up and fight, Isay."
A great light like dawn came into Mr. Turnbull's face.
Behind hisred hair and beard he turned deadly pale with pleasure.
Here,after twenty lone years of useless toil, he had his reward.
Someone was angry with the paper.
He bounded to his feet like aboy; he saw a new youth opening before him.
And as notunfrequently happens to middle-aged gentlemen when they see a newyouth opening before them, he found himself in the presence ofthe police.
The policemen, after some ponderous questionings, collared boththe two enthusiasts.
They were more respectful, however, to theyoung man who had smashed the window, than to the miscreant whohad had his window smashed.
There was an air of refined mysteryabout Evan MacIan, which did not exist in the irate littleshopkeeper, an air of refined mystery which appealed to thepolicemen, for policemen, like most other English types, are atonce snobs and poets.
MacIan might possibly be a gentleman, theyfelt; the editor manifestly was not.
And the editor's finerational republican appeals to his respect for law, and hisardour to be tried by his fellow citizens, seemed to the policequite as much gibberish as Evan's mysticism could have done.
Thepolice were not used to hearing principles, even the principlesof their own existence.
The police magistrate, before whom they were hurried and tried,was a Mr. Cumberland Vane, a cheerful, middle-aged gentleman,honourably celebrated for the lightness of his sentences and thelightness of his conversation.
He occasionally worked himself upinto a sort of theoretic rage about certain particular offenders,such as the men who took pokers to their wives, talked in aloose, sentimental way about the desirability of flogging them,and was hopelessly bewildered by the fact that the wives seemedeven more angry with him than with their husbands.
He was a tall,spruce man, with a twist of black moustache and incomparablemorning dress.
He looked like a gentleman, and yet, somehow, likea stage gentleman.
He had often treated serious crimes against mere order orproperty with a humane flippancy.
Hence, about the mere breakingof an editor's window, he was almost uproarious.
"Come, Mr. MacIan, come," he said, leaning back in his chair, "doyou generally enter you friends' houses by walking through theglass?"
(Laughter.)
"He is not my friend," said Evan, with the stolidity of a dullchild.
"Not your friend, eh?"
said the magistrate, sparkling.
"Is heyour brother-in-law?"
(Loud and prolonged laughter.)
"He is my enemy," said Evan, simply; "he is the enemy of God."
Mr. Vane shifted sharply in his seat, dropping the eye-glass outof his eye in a momentary and not unmanly embarrassment.
"You mustn't talk like that here," he said, roughly, and in akind of hurry, "that has nothing to do with us."
Evan opened his great, blue eyes; "God," he began.
"Be quiet," said the magistrate, angrily, "it is most undesirablethat things of that sort should be spoken about--a--in public,and in an ordinary Court of Justice.
Religion is--a--too personala matter to be mentioned in such a place."
"Is it?"
answered the Highlander, "then what did those policemenswear by just now?"
"That is no parallel," answered Vane, rather irritably; "ofcourse there is a form of oath--to be taken reverently--reverently, and there's an end of it.
But to talk in a publicplace about one's most sacred and private sentiments--well, Icall it bad taste.
(Slight applause.)
I call it irreverent.
I call it irreverent, and I'm not specially orthodox either."
"I see you are not," said Evan, "but I am."
"We are wondering from the point," said the police magistrate,pulling himself together.
"May I ask why you smashed this worthy citizen's window?"
Evan turned a little pale at the mere memory, but he answeredwith the same cold and deadly literalism that he showedthroughout.
"Because he blasphemed Our Lady."
"I tell you once and for all," cried Mr. Cumberland Vane, rappinghis knuckles angrily on the table, "I tell you, once and for all,my man, that I will not have you turning on any religious rant orcant here.
Don't imagine that it will impress me.
The mostreligious people are not those who talk about it.
(Applause.)
You answer the questions and do nothing else."
"I did nothing else," said Evan, with a slight smile.
"Eh," cried Vane, glaring through his eye-glass.
"You asked me why I broke his window," said MacIan, with a faceof wood.
"I answered, 'Because he blasphemed Our Lady.'
I hadno other reason.
So I have no other answer."
Vane continued togaze at him with a sternness not habitual to him.
"You are not going the right way to work, Sir," he said, withseverity.
"You are not going the right way to work to--a--haveyour case treated with special consideration.
If you had simplyexpressed regret for what you had done, I should have beenstrongly inclined to dismiss the matter as an outbreak of temper.
Even now, if you say that you are sorry I shall only----""But I am not in the least sorry," said Evan, "I am verypleased."
"I really believe you are insane," said the stipendiary,indignantly, for he had really been doing his best as agood-natured man, to compose the dispute.
"What conceivable righthave you to break other people's windows because their opinionsdo not agree with yours?
This man only gave expression to hissincere belief."
"So did I," said the Highlander.
"And who are you?"
exploded Vane.
"Are your views necessarily theright ones?
Are you necessarily in possession of the truth?"
"Yes," said MacIan.
The magistrate broke into a contemptuous laugh.
"Oh, you want a nurse to look after you," he said.
"You must payL10."
Evan MacIan plunged his hands into his loose grey garment anddrew out a queer looking leather purse.
It contained exactlytwelve sovereigns.
He paid down the ten, coin by coin, insilence, and equally silently returned the remaining two to thereceptacle.
Then he said, "May I say a word, your worship?"
Cumberland Vane seemed half hypnotized with the silence andautomatic movements of the stranger; he made a movement with hishead which might have been either "yes" or "no".
"I only wishedto say, your worship," said MacIan, putting back the purse in histrouser pocket, "that smashing that shop window was, I confess, auseless and rather irregular business.
It may be excused,however, as a mere preliminary to further proceedings, a sort ofpreface.
Wherever and whenever I meet that man," and he pointedto the editor of _The Atheist_, "whether it be outside this doorin ten minutes from now, or twenty years hence in some distantcountry, wherever and whenever I meet that man, I will fight him.
Do not be afraid.
I will not rush at him like a bully, or bearhim down with any brute superiority.
I will fight him like agentleman; I will fight him as our fathers fought.
He shallchoose how, sword or pistol, horse or foot.
But if he refuses, Iwill write his cowardice on every wall in the world.
If he hadsaid of my mother what he said of the Mother of God, there is nota club of clean men in Europe that would deny my right to callhim out.
If he had said it of my wife, you English wouldyourselves have pardoned me for beating him like a dog in themarket place.
Your worship, I have no mother; I have no wife.
Ihave only that which the poor have equally with the rich; whichthe lonely have equally with the man of many friends.
To me thiswhole strange world is homely, because in the heart of it thereis a home; to me this cruel world is kindly, because higher thanthe heavens there is something more human than humanity.
If a manmust not fight for this, may he fight for anything?
I would fightfor my friend, but if I lost my friend, I should still be there.
I would fight for my country, but if I lost my country, I shouldstill exist.
But if what that devil dreams were true, I shouldnot be--I should burst like a bubble and be gone.
I could notlive in that imbecile universe.
Shall I not fight for my ownexistence?"
The magistrate recovered his voice and his presence of mind.
Thefirst part of the speech, the bombastic and brutally practicalchallenge, stunned him with surprise; but the rest of Evan'sremarks, branching off as they did into theoretic phrases, gavehis vague and very English mind (full of memories of the hedgingand compromise in English public speaking) an indistinctsensation of relief, as if the man, though mad, were not sodangerous as he had thought.
He went into a sort of wearylaughter.
"For Heaven's sake, man," he said, "don't talk so much.
Let otherpeople have a chance (laughter).
I trust all that you said aboutasking Mr. Turnbull to fight, may be regarded as rubbish.
In caseof accidents, however, I must bind you over to keep the peace."
"To keep the peace," repeated Evan, "with whom?"
"With Mr. Turnbull," said Vane.
"Certainly not," answered MacIan.
"What has he to do with peace?"
"Do you mean to say," began the magistrate, "that you refuseto..."  The voice of Turnbull himself clove in for the first time.
"Might I suggest," he said, "That I, your worship, can settle tosome extent this absurd matter myself.
This rather wild gentlemanpromises that he will not attack me with any ordinary assault--and if he does, you may be sure the police shall hear of it.
Buthe says he will not.
He says he will challenge me to a duel; andI cannot say anything stronger about his mental state than to saythat I think that it is highly probable that he will.
(Laughter.)
But it takes two to make a duel, your worship (renewed laughter).
I do not in the least mind being described on every wall in theworld as the coward who would not fight a man in Fleet Street,about whether the Virgin Mary had a parallel in Mesopotamianmythology.
No, your worship.
You need not trouble to bind himover to keep the peace.
I bind myself over to keep the peace,and you may rest quite satisfied that there will be no duel withme in it."
Mr. Cumberland Vane rolled about, laughing in a sort of relief.
"You're like a breath of April, sir," he cried.
"You're ozoneafter that fellow.
You're perfectly right.
Perhaps I have takenthe thing too seriously.
I should love to see him sending youchallenges and to see you smiling.
Well, well."
Evan went out of the Court of Justice free, but strangely shaken,like a sick man.
Any punishment of suppression he would have feltas natural; but the sudden juncture between the laughter of hisjudge and the laughter of the man he had wronged, made him feelsuddenly small, or at least, defeated.
It was really true thatthe whole modern world regarded his world as a bubble.
No crueltycould have shown it, but their kindness showed it with a ghastlyclearness.
As he was brooding, he suddenly became conscious of asmall, stern figure, fronting him in silence.
Its eyes were greyand awful, and its beard red.
It was Turnbull.
"Well, sir," said the editor of _The Atheist_, "where is thefight to be?
Name the field, sir."
Evan stood thunderstruck.
He stammered out something, he knew notwhat; he only guessed it by the answer of the other.
"Do I want to fight?
Do I want to fight?"
cried the furiousFree-thinker.
"Why, you moonstruck scarecrow of superstition, doyou think your dirty saints are the only people who can die?
Haven't you hung atheists, and burned them, and boiled them, anddid they ever deny their faith?
Do you think we don't want tofight?
Night and day I have prayed--I have longed--for an atheistrevolution--I have longed to see your blood and ours on thestreets.
Let it be yours or mine?"
"But you said..." began MacIan.
"I know," said Turnbull scornfully.
"And what did you say?
Youdamned fool, you said things that might have got us locked up fora year, and shadowed by the coppers for half a decade.
If youwanted to fight, why did you tell that ass you wanted to?
I gotyou out, to fight if you want to.
Now, fight if you dare."
"I swear to you, then," said MacIan, after a pause.
"I swear toyou that nothing shall come between us.
I swear to you thatnothing shall be in my heart or in my head till our swords clashtogether.
I swear it by the God you have denied, by the BlessedLady you have blasphemed; I swear it by the seven swords in herheart.
I swear it by the Holy Island where my fathers are, by thehonour of my mother, by the secret of my people, and by thechalice of the Blood of God."
The atheist drew up his head.
"And I," he said, "give my word."
III.
SOME OLD CURIOSITIESThe evening sky, a dome of solid gold, unflaked even by a singlesunset cloud, steeped the meanest sights of London in a strangeand mellow light.
It made a little greasy street of St. Martin'sLane look as if it were paved with gold.
It made the pawnbroker'shalf-way down it shine as if it were really that Mountain ofPiety that the French poetic instinct has named it; it made themean pseudo-French bookshop, next but one to it, a shop packedwith dreary indecency, show for a moment a kind of Parisiancolour.
And the shop that stood between the pawnshop and the shopof dreary indecency, showed with quite a blaze of old worldbeauty, for it was, by accident, a shop not unbeautiful initself.
The front window had a glimmer of bronze and blue steel,lit, as by a few stars, by the sparks of what were alleged to bejewels; for it was in brief, a shop of bric-a-brac and oldcuriosities.
A row of half-burnished seventeenth-century swordsran like an ornate railing along the front of the window; behindwas a darker glimmer of old oak and old armour; and higher uphung the most extraordinary looking South Sea tools or utensils,whether designed for killing enemies or merely for cooking them,no mere white man could possibly conjecture.
But the romance ofthe eye, which really on this rich evening, clung about the shop,had its main source in the accident of two doors standing open,the front door that opened on the street and a back door thatopened on an odd green square of garden, that the sun turned to asquare of gold.
There is nothing more beautiful than thus to lookas it were through the archway of a house; as if the open skywere an interior chamber, and the sun a secret lamp of the place.
I have suggested that the sunset light made everything lovely.
Tosay that it made the keeper of the curiosity shop lovely would bea tribute to it perhaps too extreme.
It would easily have madehim beautiful if he had been merely squalid; if he had been a Jewof the Fagin type.
But he was a Jew of another and much lessadmirable type; a Jew with a very well-sounding name.
For thoughthere are no hard tests for separating the tares and the wheat ofany people, one rude but efficient guide is that the nice Jew iscalled Moses Solomon, and the nasty Jew is called Thornton Percy.
The keeper of the curiosity shop was of the Thornton Percy branchof the chosen people; he belonged to those Lost Ten Tribes whoseindustrious object is to lose themselves.
He was a man stillyoung, but already corpulent, with sleek dark hair, heavyhandsome clothes, and a full, fat, permanent smile, which lookedat the first glance kindly, and at the second cowardly.
The nameover his shop was Henry Gordon, but two Scotchmen who were in hisshop that evening could come upon no trace of a Scotch accent.
These two Scotchmen in this shop were careful purchasers, butfree-handed payers.
One of them who seemed to be the principaland the authority (whom, indeed, Mr. Henry Gordon fancied he hadseen somewhere before), was a small, sturdy fellow, with finegrey eyes, a square red tie and a square red beard, that hecarried aggressively forward as if he defied anyone to pull it.
The other kept so much in the background in comparison that helooked almost ghostly in his grey cloak or plaid, a tall, sallow,silent young man.
The two Scotchmen were interested in seventeenth-century swords.
They were fastidious about them.
They had a whole armoury ofthese weapons brought out and rolled clattering about thecounter, until they found two of precisely the same length.
Presumably they desired the exact symmetry for some decorativetrophy.
Even then they felt the points, poised the swords forbalance and bent them in a circle to see that they sprangstraight again; which, for decorative purposes, seems carryingrealism rather far.
"These will do," said the strange person with the red beard.
"And perhaps I had better pay for them at once.
And as you arethe challenger, Mr. MacIan, perhaps you had better explain thesituation."
The tall Scotchman in grey took a step forward and spoke in avoice quite clear and bold, and yet somehow lifeless, like a mangoing through an ancient formality.
"The fact is, Mr. Gordon, we have to place our honour in yourhands.
Words have passed between Mr. Turnbull and myself on agrave and invaluable matter, which can only be atoned for byfighting.
Unfortunately, as the police are in some sense pursuingus, we are hurried, and must fight now and without seconds.
Butif you will be so kind as to take us into your little garden andsee far play, we shall feel how----"The shopman recovered himself from a stunning surprise and burstout:"Gentlemen, are you drunk?
A duel!
A duel in my garden.
Gohome, gentlemen, go home.
Why, what did you quarrel about?"
"We quarrelled," said Evan, in the same dead voice, "aboutreligion."
The fat shopkeeper rolled about in his chair withenjoyment.
"Well, this is a funny game," he said.
"So you want to commitmurder on behalf of religion.
Well, well my religion is a littlerespect for humanity, and----""Excuse me," cut in Turnbull, suddenly and fiercely, pointingtowards the pawnbroker's next door.
"Don't you own that shop?"
"Why--er--yes," said Gordon.
"And don't you own that shop?"
repeated the secularist, pointingbackward to the pornographic bookseller.
"What if I do?"
"Why, then," cried Turnbull, with grating contempt.
"I will leavethe religion of humanity confidently in your hands; but I amsorry I troubled you about such a thing as honour.
Look here, myman.
I do believe in humanity.
I do believe in liberty.
My fatherdied for it under the swords of the Yeomanry.
I am going to diefor it, if need be, under that sword on your counter.
But ifthere is one sight that makes me doubt it it is your foul fatface.
It is hard to believe you were not meant to be ruled like adog or killed like a cockroach.
Don't try your slave's philosophyon me.
We are going to fight, and we are going to fight in yourgarden, with your swords.
Be still!
Raise your voice above awhisper, and I run you through the body."
Turnbull put the bright point of the sword against the gaywaistcoat of the dealer, who stood choking with rage and fear,and an astonishment so crushing as to be greater than either.
"MacIan," said Turnbull, falling almost into the familiar tone ofa business partner, "MacIan, tie up this fellow and put a gag inhis mouth.
Be still, I say, or I kill you where you stand."
The man was too frightened to scream, but he struggled wildly,while Evan MacIan, whose long, lean hands were unusuallypowerful, tightened some old curtain cords round him, strapped arope gag in his mouth and rolled him on his back on the floor.
"There's nothing very strong here," said Evan, looking about him.
"I'm afraid he'll work through that gag in half an hour or so."
"Yes," said Turnbull, "but one of us will be killed by thattime."
"Well, let's hope so," said the Highlander, glancing doubtfullyat the squirming thing on the floor.
"And now," said Turnbull, twirling his fiery moustache andfingering his sword, "let us go into the garden.
What anexquisite summer evening!"
MacIan said nothing, but lifting his sword from the counter wentout into the sun.
The brilliant light ran along the blades, filling the channels ofthem with white fire; the combatants stuck their swords in theturf and took off their hats, coats, waistcoats, and boots.
Evansaid a short Latin prayer to himself, during which Turnbull madesomething of a parade of lighting a cigarette which he flung awaythe instant after, when he saw MacIan apparently standing ready.
Yet MacIan was not exactly ready.
He stood staring like a manstricken with a trance.
"What are you staring at?"
asked Turnbull.
"Do you see thebobbies?"
"I see Jerusalem," said Evan, "all covered with the shields andstandards of the Saracens."
"Jerusalem!"
said Turnbull, laughing.
"Well, we've taken the onlyinhabitant into captivity."
And he picked up his sword and made it whistle like a boy's wand.
"I beg your pardon," said MacIan, dryly.
"Let us begin."
MacIan made a military salute with his weapon, which Turnbullcopied or parodied with an impatient contempt; and in thestillness of the garden the swords came together with a clearsound like a bell.
The instant the blades touched, each felt themtingle to their very points with a personal vitality, as if theywere two naked nerves of steel.
Evan had worn throughout an airof apathy, which might have been the stale apathy of one whowants nothing.
But it was indeed the more dreadful apathy of onewho wants something and will care for nothing else.
And this wasseen suddenly; for the instant Evan engaged he disengaged andlunged with an infernal violence.
His opponent with a desperatepromptitude parried and riposted; the parry only just succeeded,the riposte failed.
Something big and unbearable seemed to havebroken finally out of Evan in that first murderous lunge, leavinghim lighter and cooler and quicker upon his feet.
He fell toagain, fiercely still, but now with a fierce caution.
The nextmoment Turnbull lunged; MacIan seemed to catch the point andthrow it away from him, and was thrusting back like athunderbolt, when a sound paralysed him; another sound besidetheir ringing weapons.
Turnbull, perhaps from an equalastonishment, perhaps from chivalry, stopped also and forebore tosend his sword through his exposed enemy.
"What's that?"
asked Evan, hoarsely.
A heavy scraping sound, as of a trunk being dragged along alittered floor, came from the dark shop behind them.
"The old Jew has broken one of his strings, and he's crawlingabout," said Turnbull.
"Be quick!
We must finish before he getshis gag out."
"Yes, yes, quick!
On guard!"
cried the Highlander.
The bladescrossed again with the same sound like song, and the men went towork again with the same white and watchful faces.
Evan, in hisimpatience, went back a little to his wildness.
He madewindmills, as the French duellists say, and though he wasprobably a shade the better fencer of the two, he found theother's point pass his face twice so close as almost to graze hischeek.
The second time he realized the actual possibility ofdefeat and pulled himself together under a shock of the sanity ofanger.
He narrowed, and, so to speak, tightened his operations:he fenced (as the swordsman's boast goes), in a wedding ring; heturned Turnbull's thrusts with a maddening and almost mechanicalclick, like that of a machine.
Whenever Turnbull's sword soughtto go over that other mere white streak it seemed to be caught ina complex network of steel.
He turned one thrust, turned another,turned another.
Then suddenly he went forward at the lunge withhis whole living weight.
Turnbull leaped back, but Evan lungedand lunged and lunged again like a devilish piston rod orbattering ram.
And high above all the sound of the struggle therebroke into the silent evening a bellowing human voice, nasal,raucous, at the highest pitch of pain.
"Help!
Help!
Police!
Murder!
Murder!"
The gag was broken; and the tongue of terrorwas loose.
"Keep on!"
gasped Turnbull.
"One may be killed before they come."
The voice of the screaming shopkeeper was loud enough to drownnot only the noise of the swords but all other noises around it,but even through its rending din there seemed to be some otherstir or scurry.
And Evan, in the very act of thrusting atTurnbull, saw something in his eyes that made him drop his sword.
The atheist, with his grey eyes at their widest and wildest, wasstaring straight over his shoulder at the little archway of shopthat opened on the street beyond.
And he saw the archway blockedand blackened with strange figures.
"We must bolt, MacIan," he said abruptly.
"And there isn't adamned second to lose either.
Do as I do."
With a bound he was beside the little cluster of his clothes andboots that lay on the lawn; he snatched them up, without waitingto put any of them on; and tucking his sword under his other arm,went wildly at the wall at the bottom of the garden and swunghimself over it.
Three seconds after he had alighted in his sockson the other side, MacIan alighted beside him, also in his socksand also carrying clothes and sword in a desperate bundle.
They were in a by-street, very lean and lonely itself, but soclose to a crowded thoroughfare that they could see the vaguemasses of vehicles going by, and could even see an individualhansom cab passing the corner at the instant.
Turnbull put hisfingers to his mouth like a gutter-snipe and whistled twice.
Evenas he did so he could hear the loud voices of the neighbours andthe police coming down the garden.
The hansom swung sharply and came tearing down the little lane athis call.
When the cabman saw his fares, however, two wild-hairedmen in their shirts and socks with naked swords under their arms,he not unnaturally brought his readiness to a rigid stop andstared suspiciously.
"You talk to him a minute," whispered Turnbull, and stepped backinto the shadow of the wall.
"We want you," said MacIan to the cabman, with a superb Scotchdrawl of indifference and assurance, "to drive us to St. PancrasStation--verra quick."
"Very sorry, sir," said the cabman, "but I'd like to know it wasall right.
Might I arst where you come from, sir?"
A second after he spoke MacIan heard a heavy voice on the otherside of the wall, saying: "I suppose I'd better get over and lookfor them.
Give me a back."
"Cabby," said MacIan, again assuming the most deliberate andlingering lowland Scotch intonation, "if ye're really verraanxious to ken whar a' come fra', I'll tell ye as a verra greatsecret.
A' come from Scotland.
And a'm gaein' to St. PancrasStation.
Open the doors, cabby."
The cabman stared, but laughed.
The heavy voice behind the wallsaid: "Now then, a better back this time, Mr.
Price."
And fromthe shadow of the wall Turnbull crept out.
He had struggledwildly into his coat (leaving his waistcoat on the pavement), andhe was with a fierce pale face climbing up the cab behind thecabman.
MacIan had no glimmering notion of what he was up to, butan instinct of discipline, inherited from a hundred men of war,made him stick to his own part and trust the other man's.
"Open the doors, cabby," he repeated, with something of theobstinate solemnity of a drunkard, "open the doors.
Did ye nohear me say St. Pancras Station?"
The top of a policeman's helmet appeared above the garden wall.
The cabman did not see it, but he was still suspicious and began:"Very sorry, sir, but..." and with that the catlike Turnbull torehim out of his seat and hurled him into the street below, wherehe lay suddenly stunned.
"Give me his hat," said Turnbull in a silver voice, that theother obeyed like a bugle.
"And get inside with the swords."
And just as the red and raging face of a policeman appeared abovethe wall, Turnbull struck the horse with a terrible cut of thewhip and the two went whirling away like a boomerang.
They had spun through seven streets and three or four squaresbefore anything further happened.
Then, in the neighbourhood ofMaida Vale, the driver opened the trap and talked through it in amanner not wholly common in conversations through that aperture.
"Mr. MacIan," he said shortly and civilly.
"Mr. Turnbull," replied his motionless fare.
"Under circumstances such as those in which we were both recentlyplaced there was no time for anything but very abrupt action.
Itrust therefore that you have no cause to complain of me if Ihave deferred until this moment a consultation with you on ourpresent position or future action.
Our present position, Mr.MacIan, I imagine that I am under no special necessity ofdescribing.
We have broken the law and we are fleeing from itsofficers.
Our future action is a thing about which I myselfentertain sufficiently strong views; but I have no right toassume or to anticipate yours, though I may have formed a decidedconception of your character and a decided notion of what theywill probably be.
Still, by every principle of intellectualjustice, I am bound to ask you now and seriously whether you wishto continue our interrupted relations."
MacIan leant his white and rather weary face back upon thecushions in order to speak up through the open door.
"Mr. Turnbull," he said, "I have nothing to add to what I havesaid before.
It is strongly borne in upon me that you and I, thesole occupants of this runaway cab, are at this moment the twomost important people in London, possibly in Europe.
I have beenlooking at all the streets as we went past, I have been lookingat all the shops as we went past, I have been looking at all thechurches as we went past.
At first, I felt a little dazed withthe vastness of it all.
I could not understand what it all meant.
But now I know exactly what it all means.
It means us.
This wholecivilization is only a dream.
You and I are the realities."
"Religious symbolism," said Mr. Turnbull, through the trap, "doesnot, as you are probably aware, appeal ordinarily to thinkers ofthe school to which I belong.
But in symbolism as you use it inthis instance, I must, I think, concede a certain truth.
We_must_ fight this thing out somewhere; because, as you truly say,we have found each other's reality.
We _must_ kill each other--orconvert each other.
I used to think all Christians werehypocrites, and I felt quite mildly towards them really.
But Iknow you are sincere--and my soul is mad against you.
In the sameway you used, I suppose, to think that all atheists thoughtatheism would leave them free for immorality--and yet in yourheart you tolerated them entirely.
Now you _know_ that I am anhonest man, and you are mad against me, as I am against you.
Yes,that's it.
You can't be angry with bad men.
But a good man in thewrong--why one thirsts for his blood.
Yes, you open for me avista of thought."
"Don't run into anything," said Evan, immovably.
"There's something in that view of yours, too," said Turnbull,and shut down the trap.
They sped on through shining streets that shot by them likearrows.
Mr. Turnbull had evidently a great deal of unusedpractical talent which was unrolling itself in this ridiculousadventure.
They had got away with such stunning promptitude thatthe police chase had in all probability not even properly begun.
But in case it had, the amateur cabman chose his dizzy coursethrough London with a strange dexterity.
He did not do what wouldhave first occurred to any ordinary outsider desiring to destroyhis tracks.
He did not cut into by-ways or twist his way throughmean streets.
His amateur common sense told him that it wasprecisely the poor street, the side street, that would be likelyto remember and report the passing of a hansom cab, like thepassing of a royal procession.
He kept chiefly to the greatroads, so full of hansoms that a wilder pair than they mighteasily have passed in the press.
In one of the quieter streetsEvan put on his boots.
Towards the top of Albany Street the singular cabman again openedthe trap.
"Mr. MacIan," he said, "I understand that we have now definitelysettled that in the conventional language honour is notsatisfied.
Our action must at least go further than it has goneunder recent interrupted conditions.
That, I believe, isunderstood."
"Perfectly," replied the other with his bootlace in his teeth.
"Under those conditions," continued Turnbull, his voice comingthrough the hole with a slight note of trepidation very unusualwith him, "I have a suggestion to make, if that can be called asuggestion, which has probably occurred to you as readily as tome.
Until the actual event comes off we are practically in theposition if not of comrades, at least of business partners.
Untilthe event comes off, therefore I should suggest that quarrellingwould be inconvenient and rather inartistic; while the ordinaryexchange of politeness between man and man would be not onlyelegant but uncommonly practical."
"You are perfectly right," answered MacIan, with his melancholyvoice, "in saying that all this has occurred to me.
All duellistsshould behave like gentlemen to each other.
But we, by thequeerness of our position, are something much more than eitherduellists or gentlemen.
We are, in the oddest and most exactsense of the term, brothers--in arms."
"Mr. MacIan," replied Turnbull, calmly, "no more need be said."
And he closed the trap once more.
They had reached Finchley Road before he opened it again.
Then he said, "Mr. MacIan, may I offer you a cigar.
It will be atouch of realism."
"Thank you," answered Evan.
"You are very kind."
And he began tosmoke in the cab.
IV.
A DISCUSSION AT DAWNThe duellists had from their own point of view escaped orconquered the chief powers of the modern world.
They hadsatisfied the magistrate, they had tied the tradesman neck andheels, and they had left the police behind.
As far as their ownfeelings went they had melted into a monstrous sea; they were butthe fare and driver of one of the million hansoms that fillLondon streets.
But they had forgotten something; they hadforgotten journalism.
They had forgotten that there exists inthe modern world, perhaps for the first time in history, a classof people whose interest is not that things should happen well orhappen badly, should happen successfully or happenunsuccessfully, should happen to the advantage of this party orthe advantage of that part, but whose interest simply is thatthings should happen.
It is the one great weakness of journalism as a picture of ourmodern existence, that it must be a picture made up entirely ofexceptions.
We announce on flaring posters that a man has fallenoff a scaffolding.
We do not announce on flaring posters that aman has not fallen off a scaffolding.
Yet this latter fact isfundamentally more exciting, as indicating that that moving towerof terror and mystery, a man, is still abroad upon the earth.
That the man has not fallen off a scaffolding is really moresensational; and it is also some thousand times more common.
Butjournalism cannot reasonably be expected thus to insist upon thepermanent miracles.
Busy editors cannot be expected to put ontheir posters, "Mr. Wilkinson Still Safe," or "Mr. Jones, ofWorthing, Not Dead Yet."
They cannot announce the happiness ofmankind at all.
They cannot describe all the forks that are notstolen, or all the marriages that are not judiciously dissolved.
Hence the complete picture they give of life is of necessityfallacious; they can only represent what is unusual.
Howeverdemocratic they may be, they are only concerned with theminority.
The incident of the religious fanatic who broke a window onLudgate Hill was alone enough to set them up in good copy for thenight.
But when the same man was brought before a magistrate anddefied his enemy to mortal combat in the open court, then thecolumns would hardly hold the excruciating information, and theheadlines were so large that there was hardly room for any of thetext.
The _Daily Telegraph_ headed a column, "A Duel onDivinity," and there was a correspondence afterwards which lastedfor months, about whether police magistrates ought to mentionreligion.
The _Daily Mail_ in its dull, sensible way, headed theevents, "Wanted to fight for the Virgin."
Mr. James Douglas, in_The Star_, presuming on his knowledge of philosophical andtheological terms, described the Christian's outbreak under thetitle of "Dualist and Duellist."
The _Daily News_ inserted acolourless account of the matter, but was pursued and eaten upfor some weeks, with letters from outlying ministers, headed"Murder and Mariolatry."
But the journalistic temperature wassteadily and consistently heated by all these influences; thejournalists had tasted blood, prospectively, and were in the moodfor more; everything in the matter prepared them for furtheroutbursts of moral indignation.
And when a gasping reporterrushed in in the last hours of the evening with the announcementthat the two heroes of the Police Court had literally been foundfighting in a London back garden, with a shopkeeper bound andgagged in the front of the house, the editors and sub-editorswere stricken still as men are by great beatitudes.
The next morning, five or six of the great London dailies burstout simultaneously into great blossoms of eloquentleader-writing.
Towards the end all the leaders tended to be thesame, but they all began differently.
The _Daily Telegraph_, forinstance began, "There will be little difference among ourreaders or among all truly English and law-abiding men touchingthe, etc.
etc."
The _Daily Mail_ said, "People must learn, in themodern world, to keep their theological differences tothemselves.
The fracas, etc.
etc."
The _Daily News_ started,"Nothing could be more inimical to the cause of true religionthan, etc.
etc."
The _Times_ began with something about Celticdisturbances of the equilibrium of Empire, and the _DailyExpress_ distinguished itself splendidly by omitting altogetherso controversial a matter and substituting a leader aboutgoloshes.
And the morning after that, the editors and the newspapers werein such a state, that, as the phrase is, there was no holdingthem.
Whatever secret and elvish thing it is that broods overeditors and suddenly turns their brains, that thing had seized onthe story of the broken glass and the duel in the garden.
Itbecame monstrous and omnipresent, as do in our time theunimportant doings of the sect of the Agapemonites, or as did atan earlier time the dreary dishonesties of the Rhodesianfinanciers.
Questions were asked about it, and even answered, inthe House of Commons.
The Government was solemnly denounced inthe papers for not having done something, nobody knew what, toprevent the window being broken.
An enormous subscription wasstarted to reimburse Mr. Gordon, the man who had been gagged inthe shop.
Mr. MacIan, one of the combatants, became for somemysterious reason, singly and hugely popular as a comic figure inthe comic papers and on the stage of the music hall.
He wasalways represented (in defiance of fact), with red whiskers, anda very red nose, and in full Highland costume.
And a song,consisting of an unimaginable number of verses, in which his namewas rhymed with flat iron, the British Lion, sly 'un, dandelion,Spion (With Kop in the next line), was sung to crowded housesevery night.
The papers developed a devouring thirst for thecapture of the fugitives; and when they had not been caught forforty-eight hours, they suddenly turned the whole matter into adetective mystery.
Letters under the heading, "Where are They,"poured in to every paper, with every conceivable kind ofexplanation, running them to earth in the Monument, the TwopennyTube, Epping Forest, Westminster Abbey, rolled up in carpets atShoolbreds, locked up in safes in Chancery Lane.
Yes, the paperswere very interesting, and Mr. Turnbull unrolled a whole bundleof them for the amusement of Mr. MacIan as they sat on a highcommon to the north of London, in the coming of the white dawn.
The darkness in the east had been broken with a bar of grey; thebar of grey was split with a sword of silver and morning lifteditself laboriously over London.
From the spot where Turnbull andMacIan were sitting on one of the barren steeps behind Hampstead,they could see the whole of London shaping itself vaguely andlargely in the grey and growing light, until the white sun stoodover it and it lay at their feet, the splendid monstrosity thatit is.
Its bewildering squares and parallelograms were compactand perfect as a Chinese puzzle; an enormous hieroglyphic whichman must decipher or die.
There fell upon both of them, but uponTurnbull more than the other, because he know more what the scenesignified, that quite indescribable sense as of a sublime andpassionate and heart-moving futility, which is never evoked bydeserts or dead men or men neglected and barbarous, which canonly be invoked by the sight of the enormous genius of manapplied to anything other than the best.
Turnbull, the oldidealistic democrat, had so often reviled the democracy andreviled them justly for their supineness, their snobbishness,their evil reverence for idle things.
He was right enough; forour democracy has only one great fault; it is not democratic.
Andafter denouncing so justly average modern men for so many yearsas sophists and as slaves, he looked down from an empty slope inHampstead and saw what gods they are.
Their achievement seemedall the more heroic and divine, because it seemed doubtfulwhether it was worth doing at all.
There seemed to be somethinggreater than mere accuracy in making such a mistake as London.
And what was to be the end of it all?
what was to be the ultimatetransformation of this common and incredible London man, thisworkman on a tram in Battersea, his clerk on an omnibus inCheapside?
Turnbull, as he stared drearily, murmured to himselfthe words of the old atheistic and revolutionary Swinburne whohad intoxicated his youth:        "And still we ask if God or man        Can loosen thee Lazarus;        Bid thee rise up republican,        And save thyself and all of us.
But no disciple's tongue can say        If thou can'st take our sins away."
Turnbull shivered slightly as if behind the earthly morning hefelt the evening of the world, the sunset of so many hopes.
Thosewords were from "Songs before Sunrise".
But Turnbull's songs attheir best were songs after sunrise, and sunrise had been no suchgreat thing after all.
Turnbull shivered again in the sharpmorning air.
MacIan was also gazing with his face towards thecity, but there was that about his blind and mystical stare thattold one, so to speak, that his eyes were turned inwards.
WhenTurnbull said something to him about London, they seemed to moveas at a summons and come out like two householders coming outinto their doorways.
"Yes," he said, with a sort of stupidity.
"It's a very bigplace."
There was a somewhat unmeaning silence, and then MacIan saidagain:"It's a very big place.
When I first came into it I wasfrightened of it.
Frightened exactly as one would be frightenedat the sight of a man forty feet high.
I am used to big thingswhere I come from, big mountains that seem to fill God'sinfinity, and the big sea that goes to the end of the world.
Butthen these things are all shapeless and confused things, not madein any familiar form.
But to see the plain, square, human thingsas large as that, houses so large and streets so large, and thetown itself so large, was like having screwed some devil'smagnifying glass into one's eye.
It was like seeing a porridgebowl as big as a house, or a mouse-trap made to catch elephants."
"Like the land of the Brobdingnagians," said Turnbull, smiling.
"Oh!
Where is that?"
said MacIan.
Turnbull said bitterly, "In a book," and the silence fellsuddenly between them again.
They were sitting in a sort of litter on the hillside; all thethings they had hurriedly collected, in various places, for theirflight, were strewn indiscriminately round them.
The two swordswith which they had lately sought each other's lives were flungdown on the grass at random, like two idle walking-sticks.
Someprovisions they had bought last night, at a low public house, incase of undefined contingencies, were tossed about like thematerials of an ordinary picnic, here a basket of chocolate, andthere a bottle of wine.
And to add to the disorder finally, therewere strewn on top of everything, the most disorderly of modernthings, newspapers, and more newspapers, and yet againnewspapers, the ministers of the modern anarchy.
Turnbull pickedup one of them drearily, and took out a pipe.
"There's a lot about us," he said.
"Do you mind if I light up?"
"Why should I mind?"
asked MacIan.
Turnbull eyed with a certain studious interest, the man who didnot understand any of the verbal courtesies; he lit his pipe andblew great clouds out of it.
"Yes," he resumed.
"The matter on which you and I are engaged isat this moment really the best copy in England.
I am ajournalist, and I know.
For the first time, perhaps, for manygenerations, the English are really more angry about a wrongthing done in England than they are about a wrong thing done inFrance."
"It is not a wrong thing," said MacIan.
Turnbull laughed.
"You seem unable to understand the ordinary useof the human language.
If I did not suspect that you were agenius, I should certainly know you were a blockhead.
I fancy wehad better be getting along and collecting our baggage."
And he jumped up and began shoving the luggage into his pockets,or strapping it on to his back.
As he thrust a tin of cannedmeat, anyhow, into his bursting side pocket, he said casually:"I only meant that you and I are the most prominent people in theEnglish papers."
"Well, what did you expect?"
asked MacIan, opening his greatgrave blue eyes.
"The papers are full of us," said Turnbull, stooping to pick upone of the swords.
MacIan stooped and picked up the other.
"Yes," he said, in his simple way.
"I have read what they have tosay.
But they don't seem to understand the point."
"The point of what?"
asked Turnbull.
"The point of the sword," said MacIan, violently, and planted thesteel point in the soil like a man planting a tree.
"That is a point," said Turnbull, grimly, "that we will discusslater.
Come along."
Turnbull tied the last tin of biscuits desperately to himselfwith string; and then spoke, like a diver girt for plunging,short and sharp.
"Now, Mr. MacIan, you must listen to me.
You must listen to me,not merely because I know the country, which you might learn bylooking at a map, but because I know the people of the country,whom you could not know by living here thirty years.
Thatinfernal city down there is awake; and it is awake against us.
All those endless rows of windows and windows are all eyesstaring at us.
All those forests of chimneys are fingers pointingat us, as we stand here on the hillside.
This thing has caughton.
For the next six mortal months they will think of nothing butus, as for six mortal months they thought of nothing but theDreyfus case.
Oh, I know it's funny.
They let starving children,who don't want to die, drop by the score without looking round.
But because two gentlemen, from private feelings of delicacy, dowant to die, they will mobilize the army and navy to preventthem.
For half a year or more, you and I, Mr. MacIan, will be anobstacle to every reform in the British Empire.
We shall preventthe Chinese being sent out of the Transvaal and the blocks beingstopped in the Strand.
We shall be the conversational substitutewhen anyone recommends Home Rule, or complains of sky signs.
Therefore, do not imagine, in your innocence, that we have onlyto melt away among those English hills as a Highland cateranmight into your god-forsaken Highland mountains.
We must beeternally on our guard; we must live the hunted life of twodistinguished criminals.
We must expect to be recognized as muchas if we were Napoleon escaping from Elba.
We must be preparedfor our descriptions being sent to every tiny village, and forour faces being recognized by every ambitious policeman.
We mustoften sleep under the stars as if we were in Africa.
Last andmost important we must not dream of effecting our--our finalsettlement, which will be a thing as famous as the Phoenix Parkmurders, unless we have made real and precise arrangements forour isolation--I will not say our safety.
We must not, in short,fight until we have thrown them off our scent, if only for amoment.
For, take my word for it, Mr. MacIan, if the BritishPublic once catches us up, the British Public will prevent theduel, if it is only by locking us both up in asylums for the restof our days."
MacIan was looking at the horizon with a rather misty look.
"I am not at all surprised," he said, "at the world being againstus.
It makes me feel I was right to----""Yes?"
said Turnbull.
"To smash your window," said MacIan.
"I have woken up the world."
"Very well, then," said Turnbull, stolidly.
"Let us look at a fewfinal facts.
Beyond that hill there is comparatively clearcountry.
Fortunately, I know the part well, and if you willfollow me exactly, and, when necessary, on your stomach, we maybe able to get ten miles out of London, literally without meetinganyone at all, which will be the best possible beginning, at anyrate.
We have provisions for at least two days and two nights,three days if we do it carefully.
We may be able to get fifty orsixty miles away without even walking into an inn door.
I havethe biscuits and the tinned meat, and the milk.
You have thechocolate, I think?
And the brandy?"
"Yes," said MacIan, like a soldier taking orders.
"Very well, then, come on.
March.
We turn under that third bushand so down into the valley."
And he set off ahead at a swingingwalk.
Then he stopped suddenly; for he realized that the other was notfollowing.
Evan MacIan was leaning on his sword with a loweringface, like a man suddenly smitten still with doubt.
"What on earth is the matter?"
asked Turnbull, staring in someanger.
Evan made no reply.
"What the deuce is the matter with you?"
demanded the leader,again, his face slowly growing as red as his beard; then he said,suddenly, and in a more human voice, "Are you in pain, MacIan?"
"Yes," replied the Highlander, without lifting his face.
"Take some brandy," cried Turnbull, walking forward hurriedlytowards him.
"You've got it."
"It's not in the body," said MacIan, in his dull, strange way.
"The pain has come into my mind.
A very dreadful thing has justcome into my thoughts."
"What the devil are you talking about?"
asked Turnbull.
MacIan broke out with a queer and living voice.
"We must fight now, Turnbull.
We must fight now.
A frightfulthing has come upon me, and I know it must be now and here.
Imust kill you here," he cried, with a sort of tearful rageimpossible to describe.
"Here, here, upon this blessed grass."
"Why, you idiot," began Turnbull.
"The hour has come--the black hour God meant for it.
Quick, itwill soon be gone.
Quick!"
And he flung the scabbard from him furiously, and stood with thesunlight sparkling along his sword.
"You confounded fool," repeated Turnbull.
"Put that thing upagain, you ass; people will come out of that house at the firstclash of the steel."
"One of us will be dead before they come," said the other,hoarsely, "for this is the hour God meant."
"Well, I never thought much of God," said the editor of _TheAtheist_, losing all patience.
"And I think less now.
Never mindwhat God meant.
Kindly enlighten my pagan darkness as to what thedevil _you_ mean."
"The hour will soon be gone.
In a moment it will be gone," saidthe madman.
"It is now, now, now that I must nail yourblaspheming body to the earth--now, now that I must avenge OurLady on her vile slanderer.
Now or never.
For the dreadfulthought is in my mind."
"And what thought," asked Turnbull, with frantic composure,"occupies what you call your mind?"
"I must kill you now," said the fanatic, "because----""Well, because," said Turnbull, patiently.
"Because I have begun to like you."
Turnbull's face had a sudden spasm in the sunlight, a change soinstantaneous that it left no trace behind it; and his featuresseemed still carved into a cold stare.
But when he spoke again heseemed like a man who was placidly pretending to misunderstandsomething that he understood perfectly well.
"Your affection expresses itself in an abrupt form," he began,but MacIan broke the brittle and frivolous speech to pieces witha violent voice.
"Do not trouble to talk like that," he said.
"You know what I mean as well as I know it.
Come on and fight, Isay.
Perhaps you are feeling just as I do."
Turnbull's face flinched again in the fierce sunlight, but hisattitude kept its contemptuous ease.
"Your Celtic mind really goes too fast for me," he said; "let mebe permitted in my heavy Lowland way to understand this newdevelopment.
My dear Mr. MacIan, what do you really mean?"
MacIan still kept the shining sword-point towards the other'sbreast.
"You know what I mean.
You mean the same yourself.
We mustfight now or else----""Or else?"
repeated Turnbull, staring at him with an almostblinding gravity.
"Or else we may not want to fight at all," answered Evan, and theend of his speech was like a despairing cry.
Turnbull took out his own sword suddenly as if to engage; thenplanting it point downwards for a moment, he said, "Before webegin, may I ask you a question?"
MacIan bowed patiently, but with burning eyes.
"You said, just now," continued Turnbull, presently, "that if wedid not fight now, we might not want to fight at all.
How wouldyou feel about the matter if we came not to want to fight atall?"
"I should feel," answered the other, "just as I should feel ifyou had drawn your sword, and I had run away from it.
I shouldfeel that because I had been weak, justice had not been done."
"Justice," answered Turnbull, with a thoughtful smile, "but weare talking about your feelings.
And what do you mean by justice,apart from your feelings?"
MacIan made a gesture of weary recognition!
"Oh, Nominalism," hesaid, with a sort of sigh, "we had all that out in the twelfthcentury."
"I wish we could have it out now," replied the other, firmly.
"Doyou really mean that if you came to think me right, you would becertainly wrong?"
"If I had a blow on the back of my head, I might come to thinkyou a green elephant," answered MacIan, "but have I not the rightto say now, that if I thought that I should think wrong?"
"Then you are quite certain that it would be wrong to like me?"
asked Turnbull, with a slight smile.
"No," said Evan, thoughtfully, "I do not say that.
It may not bethe devil, it may be some part of God I am not meant to know.
ButI had a work to do, and it is making the work difficult."
"And I suppose," said the atheist, quite gently, "that you and Iknow all about which part of God we ought to know."
MacIan burst out like a man driven back and explainingeverything.
"The Church is not a thing like the Athenaeum Club," he cried.
"If the Athenaeum Club lost all its members, the Athenaeum Clubwould dissolve and cease to exist.
But when we belong to theChurch we belong to something which is outside all of us; whichis outside everything you talk about, outside the Cardinals andthe Pope.
They belong to it, but it does not belong to them.
Ifwe all fell dead suddenly, the Church would still somehow existin God.
Confound it all, don't you see that I am more sure of itsexistence than I am of my own existence?
And yet you ask me totrust my temperament, my own temperament, which can be turnedupside down by two bottles of claret or an attack of thejaundice.
You ask me to trust that when it softens towards youand not to trust the thing which I believe to be outside myselfand more real than the blood in my body."
"Stop a moment," said Turnbull, in the same easy tone, "Even inthe very act of saying that you believe this or that, you implythat there is a part of yourself that you trust even if there aremany parts which you mistrust.
If it is only you that like me,surely, also, it is only you that believe in the CatholicChurch."
Evan remained in an unmoved and grave attitude.
"There is a partof me which is divine," he answered, "a part that can be trusted,but there are also affections which are entirely animal andidle."
"And you are quite certain, I suppose," continued Turnbull, "thatif even you esteem me the esteem would be wholly animal andidle?"
For the first time MacIan started as if he had notexpected the thing that was said to him.
At last he said:"Whatever in earth or heaven it is that has joined us twotogether, it seems to be something which makes it impossible tolie.
No, I do not think that the movement in me towards youwas...was that surface sort of thing.
It may have been somethingdeeper...something strange.
I cannot understand the thing at all.
But understand this and understand it thoroughly, if I loved youmy love might be divine.
No, it is not some trifle that we arefighting about.
It is not some superstition or some symbol.
Whenyou wrote those words about Our Lady, you were in that act awicked man doing a wicked thing.
If I hate you it is because youhave hated goodness.
And if I like you...it is because you aregood."
Turnbull's face wore an indecipherable expression.
"Well, shall we fight now?"
he said.
"Yes," said MacIan, with a sudden contraction of his black brows,"yes, it must be now."
The bright swords crossed, and the first touch of them,travelling down blade and arm, told each combatant that the heartof the other was awakened.
It was not in that way that the swordsrang together when they had rushed on each other in the littlegarden behind the dealer's shop.
There was a pause, and then MacIan made a movement as if tothrust, and almost at the same moment Turnbull suddenly andcalmly dropped his sword.
Evan stared round in an unusualbewilderment, and then realized that a large man in pale clothesand a Panama hat was strolling serenely towards them.
V. THE PEACEMAKERWhen the combatants, with crossed swords, became suddenlyconscious of a third party, they each made the same movement.
Itwas as quick as the snap of a pistol, and they altered itinstantaneously and recovered their original pose, but they hadboth made it, they had both seen it, and they both knew what itwas.
It was not a movement of anger at being interrupted.
Say orthink what they would, it was a movement of relief.
A forcewithin them, and yet quite beyond them, seemed slowly andpitilessly washing away the adamant of their oath.
As mistakenlovers might watch the inevitable sunset of first love, these menwatched the sunset of their first hatred.
Their hearts were growing weaker and weaker against each other.
When their weapons rang and riposted in the little London garden,they could have been very certain that if a third party hadinterrupted them something at least would have happened.
Theywould have killed each other or they would have killed him.
Butnow nothing could undo or deny that flash of fact, that for asecond they had been glad to be interrupted.
Some new and strangething was rising higher and higher in their hearts like a highsea at night.
It was something that seemed all the moremerciless, because it might turn out an enormous mercy.
Wasthere, perhaps, some such fatalism in friendship as all loverstalk about in love?
Did God make men love each other againsttheir will?
"I'm sure you'll excuse my speaking to you," said the stranger,in a voice at once eager and deprecating.
The voice was too polite for good manners.
It was incongruouswith the eccentric spectacle of the duellists which ought to havestartled a sane and free man.
It was also incongruous with thefull and healthy, though rather loose physique of the man whospoke.
At the first glance he looked a fine animal, with curlinggold beard and hair, and blue eyes, unusually bright.
It was onlyat the second glance that the mind felt a sudden and perhapsunmeaning irritation at the way in which the gold beard retreatedbackwards into the waistcoat, and the way in which the finelyshaped nose went forward as if smelling its way.
And it was only,perhaps, at the hundredth glance that the bright blue eyes, whichnormally before and after the instant seemed brilliant withintelligence, seemed as it were to be brilliant with idiocy.
Hewas a heavy, healthy-looking man, who looked all the largerbecause of the loose, light coloured clothes that he wore, andthat had in their extreme lightness and looseness, almost a touchof the tropics.
But a closer examination of his attire would haveshown that even in the tropics it would have been unique; but itwas all woven according to some hygienic texture which no humanbeing had ever heard of before, and which was absolutelynecessary even for a day's health.
He wore a huge broad-brimmedhat, equally hygienic, very much at the back of his head, and hisvoice coming out of so heavy and hearty a type of man was, as Ihave said, startlingly shrill and deferential.
"I'm sure you'll excuse my speaking to you," he said.
"Now, Iwonder if you are in some little difficulty which, after all, wecould settle very comfortably together?
Now, you don't mind mysaying this, do you?"
The face of both combatants remained somewhat solid under thisappeal.
But the stranger, probably taking their silence for agathering shame, continued with a kind of gaiety:"So you are the young men I have read about in the papers.
Well,of course, when one is young, one is rather romantic.
Do you knowwhat I always say to young people?"
A blank silence followed this gay inquiry.
Then Turnbull said ina colourless voice:"As I was forty-seven last birthday, I probably came into theworld too soon for the experience."
"Very good, very good," said the friendly person.
"Dry Scotchhumour.
Dry Scotch humour.
Well now.
I understand that you twopeople want to fight a duel.
I suppose you aren't much up in themodern world.
We've quite outgrown duelling, you know.
In fact,Tolstoy tells us that we shall soon outgrow war, which he says issimply a duel between nations.
A duel between nations.
But thereis no doubt about our having outgrown duelling."
Waiting for some effect upon his wooden auditors, the strangerstood beaming for a moment and then resumed:"Now, they tell me in the newspapers that you are really wantingto fight about something connected with Roman Catholicism.
Now,do you know what I always say to Roman Catholics?"
"No," said Turnbull, heavily.
"Do _they_?"
It seemed to be acharacteristic of the hearty, hygienic gentleman that he alwaysforgot the speech he had made the moment before.
Withoutenlarging further on the fixed form of his appeal to the Churchof Rome, he laughed cordially at Turnbull's answer; then hiswandering blue eyes caught the sunlight on the swords, and heassumed a good-humoured gravity.
"But you know this is a serious matter," he said, eyeing Turnbulland MacIan, as if they had just been keeping the table in a roarwith their frivolities.
"I am sure that if I appealed to yourhigher natures...your higher natures.
Every man has a highernature and a lower nature.
Now, let us put the matter veryplainly, and without any romantic nonsense about honour oranything of that sort.
Is not bloodshed a great sin?"
"No," said MacIan, speaking for the first time.
"Well, really, really!"
said the peacemaker.
"Murder is a sin," said the immovable Highlander.
"There is nosin of bloodshed."
"Well, we won't quarrel about a word," said the other,pleasantly.
"Why on earth not?"
said MacIan, with a sudden asperity.
"Whyshouldn't we quarrel about a word?
What is the good of words ifthey aren't important enough to quarrel over?
Why do we chooseone word more than another if there isn't any difference betweenthem?
If you called a woman a chimpanzee instead of an angel,wouldn't there be a quarrel about a word?
If you're not going toargue about words, what are you going to argue about?
Are yougoing to convey your meaning to me by moving your ears?
TheChurch and the heresies always used to fight about words, becausethey are the only things worth fighting about.
I say that murderis a sin, and bloodshed is not, and that there is as muchdifference between those words as there is between the word 'yes'and the word 'no'; or rather more difference, for 'yes' and 'no',at least, belong to the same category.
Murder is a spiritualincident.
Bloodshed is a physical incident.
A surgeon commitsbloodshed.
"Ah, you're a casuist!"
said the large man, wagging his head.
"Now, do you know what I always say to casuists...?"
MacIan made a violent gesture; and Turnbull broke into openlaughter.
The peacemaker did not seem to be in the least annoyed,but continued in unabated enjoyment.
"Well, well," he said, "let us get back to the point.
Now Tolstoyhas shown that force is no remedy; so you see the position inwhich I am placed.
I am doing my best to stop what I'm sure youwon't mind my calling this really useless violence, this reallyquite wrong violence of yours.
But it's against my principles tocall in the police against you, because the police are still on alower moral plane, so to speak, because, in short, the policeundoubtedly sometimes employ force.
Tolstoy has shown thatviolence merely breeds violence in the person towards whom it isused, whereas Love, on the other hand, breeds Love.
So you seehow I am placed.
I am reduced to use Love in order to stop you.
I am obliged to use Love."
He gave to the word an indescribable sound of something hard andheavy, as if he were saying "boots".
Turnbull suddenly grippedhis sword and said, shortly, "I see how you are placed quitewell, sir.
You will not call the police.
Mr. MacIan, shall weengage?"
MacIan plucked his sword out of the grass.
"I must and will stop this shocking crime," cried the Tolstoian,crimson in the face.
"It is against all modern ideas.
It isagainst the principle of love.
How you, sir, who pretend to be aChristian..."MacIan turned upon him with a white face and bitter lip.
"Sir,"he said, "talk about the principle of love as much as you like.
You seem to me colder than a lump of stone; but I am willing tobelieve that you may at some time have loved a cat, or a dog, ora child.
When you were a baby, I suppose you loved your mother.
Talk about love, then, till the world is sick of the word.
Butdon't you talk about Christianity.
Don't you dare to say oneword, white or black, about it.
Christianity is, as far as youare concerned, a horrible mystery.
Keep clear of it, keep silentupon it, as you would upon an abomination.
It is a thing that hasmade men slay and torture each other; and you will never knowwhy.
It is a thing that has made men do evil that good mightcome; and you will never understand the evil, let alone the good.
Christianity is a thing that could only make you vomit, till youare other than you are.
I would not justify it to you even if Icould.
Hate it, in God's name, as Turnbull does, who is a man.
It is a monstrous thing, for which men die.
And if you will standhere and talk about love for another ten minutes it is veryprobable that you will see a man die for it."
And he fell on guard.
Turnbull was busy settling something loosein his elaborate hilt, and the pause was broken by the stranger.
"Suppose I call the police?"
he said, with a heated face.
"And deny your most sacred dogma," said MacIan.
"Dogma!"
cried the man, in a sort of dismay.
"Oh, we have no_dogmas_, you know!"
There was another silence, and he said again, airily:"You know, I think, there's something in what Shaw teaches aboutno moral principles being quite fixed.
Have you ever read _TheQuintessence of Ibsenism_?
Of course he went very wrong over thewar."
Turnbull, with a bent, flushed face, was tying up the loose pieceof the pommel with string.
With the string in his teeth, he said,"Oh, make up your damned mind and clear out!"
"It's a serious thing," said the philosopher, shaking his head.
"I must be alone and consider which is the higher point of view.
I rather feel that in a case so extreme as this..." and he wentslowly away.
As he disappeared among the trees, they heard himmurmuring in a sing-song voice, "New occasions teach new duties,"out of a poem by James Russell Lowell.
"Ah," said MacIan, drawing a deep breath.
"Don't you believe inprayer now?
I prayed for an angel."
"An hour ago," said the Highlander, in his heavy meditativevoice, "I felt the devil weakening my heart and my oath againstyou, and I prayed that God would send an angel to my aid."
"Well?"
inquired the other, finishing his mending and wrappingthe rest of the string round his hand to get a firmer grip.
"Well?"
"Well, that man was an angel," said MacIan.
"I didn't know they were as bad as that," answered Turnbull.
"We know that devils sometimes quote Scripture and counterfeitgood," replied the mystic.
"Why should not angels sometimes cometo show us the black abyss of evil on whose brink we stand.
Ifthat man had not tried to stop us...I might...I might havestopped."
"I know what you mean," said Turnbull, grimly.
"But then he came," broke out MacIan, "and my soul said to me:'Give up fighting, and you will become like That.
Give up vowsand dogmas, and fixed things, and you may grow like That.
You maylearn, also, that fog of false philosophy.
You may grow fond ofthat mire of crawling, cowardly morals, and you may come to thinka blow bad, because it hurts, and not because it humiliates.
Youmay come to think murder wrong, because it is violent, and notbecause it is unjust.
Oh, you blasphemer of the good, an hour agoI almost loved you!
But do not fear for me now.
I have heard theword Love pronounced in _his_ intonation; and I know exactly whatit means.
On guard!'"
The swords caught on each other with a dreadful clang and jar,full of the old energy and hate; and at once plunged andreplunged.
Once more each man's heart had become the magnet of amad sword.
Suddenly, furious as they were, they were frozen for amoment motionless.
"What noise is that?"
asked the Highlander, hoarsely.
"I think I know," replied Turnbull.
"What?...
What?"
cried the other.
"The student of Shaw and Tolstoy has made up his remarkablemind," said Turnbull, quietly.
"The police are coming up thehill."
VI.
THE OTHER PHILOSOPHERBetween high hedges in Hertfordshire, hedges so high as to createa kind of grove, two men were running.
They did not run in ascampering or feverish manner, but in the steady swing of thependulum.
Across the great plains and uplands to the right andleft of the lane, a long tide of sunset light rolled like a seaof ruby, lighting up the long terraces of the hills and pickingout the few windows of the scattered hamlets in startlingblood-red sparks.
But the lane was cut deep in the hill andremained in an abrupt shadow.
The two men running in it had animpression not uncommonly experienced between those wild greenEnglish walls; a sense of being led between the walls of a maze.
Though their pace was steady it was vigorous; their faces wereheated and their eyes fixed and bright.
There was, indeed,something a little mad in the contrast between the evening'sstillness over the empty country-side, and these two figuresfleeing wildly from nothing.
They had the look of two lunatics,possibly they were.
"Are you all right?"
said Turnbull, with civility.
"Can you keepthis up?"
"Quite easily, thank you," replied MacIan.
"I run very well."
"Is that a qualification in a family of warriors?"
askedTurnbull.
"Undoubtedly.
Rapid movement is essential," answered MacIan, whonever saw a joke in his life.
Turnbull broke out into a short laugh, and silence fell betweenthem, the panting silence of runners.
Then MacIan said: "We run better than any of those policemen.
They are too fat.
Why do you make your policemen so fat?"
"I didn't do much towards making them fat myself," repliedTurnbull, genially, "but I flatter myself that I am now doingsomething towards making them thin.
You'll see they will be aslean as rakes by the time they catch us.
They will look like yourfriend, Cardinal Manning."
"But they won't catch us," said MacIan, in his literal way.
"No, we beat them in the great military art of running away,"returned the other.
"They won't catch us unless----"MacIan turned his long equine face inquiringly.
"Unless what?"
hesaid, for Turnbull had gone silent suddenly, and seemed to belistening intently as he ran as a horse does with his ears turnedback.
"Unless what?"
repeated the Highlander.
"Unless they do--what they have done.
Listen."
MacIan slackenedhis trot, and turned his head to the trail they had left behindthem.
Across two or three billows of the up and down lane camealong the ground the unmistakable throbbing of horses' hoofs.
"They have put the mounted police on us," said Turnbull, shortly.
"Good Lord, one would think we were a Revolution."
"So we are," said MacIan calmly.
"What shall we do?
Shall we turnon them with our points?"
"It may come to that," answered Turnbull, "though if it does, Ireckon that will be the last act.
We must put it off if we can."
And he stared and peered about him between the bushes.
"If wecould hide somewhere the beasts might go by us," he said.
"Thepolice have their faults, but thank God they're inefficient.
Why,here's the very thing.
Be quick and quiet.
Follow me."
He suddenly swung himself up the high bank on one side of thelane.
It was almost as high and smooth as a wall, and on the topof it the black hedge stood out over them as an angle, almostlike a thatched roof of the lane.
And the burning evening skylooked down at them through the tangle with red eyes as of anarmy of goblins.
Turnbull hoisted himself up and broke the hedge with his body.
Ashis head and shoulders rose above it they turned to flame in thefull glow as if lit up by an immense firelight.
His red hair andbeard looked almost scarlet, and his pale face as bright as aboy's.
Something violent, something that was at once love andhatred, surged in the strange heart of the Gael below him.
He hadan unutterable sense of epic importance, as if he were somehowlifting all humanity into a prouder and more passionate region ofthe air.
As he swung himself up also into the evening light hefelt as if he were rising on enormous wings.
Legends of the morning of the world which he had heard inchildhood or read in youth came back upon him in a cloudysplendour, purple tales of wrath and friendship, like Roland andOliver, or Balin and Balan, reminding him of emotionalentanglements.
Men who had loved each other and then fought eachother; men who had fought each other and then loved each other,together made a mixed but monstrous sense of momentousness.
Thecrimson seas of the sunset seemed to him like a bursting out ofsome sacred blood, as if the heart of the world had broken.
Turnbull was wholly unaffected by any written or spoken poetry;his was a powerful and prosaic mind.
But even upon him there camefor the moment something out of the earth and the passionate endsof the sky.
The only evidence was in his voice, which was stillpractical but a shade more quiet.
"Do you see that summer-house-looking thing over there?"
he askedshortly.
"That will do for us very well."
Keeping himself free from the tangle of the hedge he strolledacross a triangle of obscure kitchen garden, and approached adismal shed or lodge a yard or two beyond it.
It was aweather-stained hut of grey wood, which with all its desolationretained a tag or two of trivial ornament, which suggested thatthe thing had once been a sort of summer-house, and the placeprobably a sort of garden.
"That is quite invisible from the road," said Turnbull, as heentered it, "and it will cover us up for the night."
MacIan looked at him gravely for a few moments.
"Sir," he said,"I ought to say something to you.
I ought to say----""Hush," said Turnbull, suddenly lifting his hand; "be still,man."
In the sudden silence, the drumming of the distant horses grewlouder and louder with inconceivable rapidity, and the cavalcadeof police rushed by below them in the lane, almost with the roarand rattle of an express train.
"I ought to tell you," continued MacIan, still staring stolidlyat the other, "that you are a great chief, and it is good to goto war behind you."
Turnbull said nothing, but turned and looked out of the foolishlattice of the little windows, then he said, "We must have foodand sleep first."
When the last echo of their eluded pursuers had died in thedistant uplands, Turnbull began to unpack the provisions with theeasy air of a man at a picnic.
He had just laid out the lastitems, put a bottle of wine on the floor, and a tin of salmon onthe window-ledge, when the bottomless silence of that forgottenplace was broken.
And it was broken by three heavy blows of astick delivered upon the door.
Turnbull looked up in the act of opening a tin and staredsilently at his companion.
MacIan's long, lean mouth had shuthard.
"Who the devil can that be?"
said Turnbull.
"God knows," said the other.
"It might be God."
Again the sound of the wooden stick reverberated on the woodendoor.
It was a curious sound and on consideration did notresemble the ordinary effects of knocking on a door foradmittance.
It was rather as if the point of a stick were plungedagain and again at the panels in an absurd attempt to make a holein them.
A wild look sprang into MacIan's eyes and he got up halfstupidly, with a kind of stagger, put his hand out and caught oneof the swords.
"Let us fight at once," he cried, "it is the endof the world."
"You're overdone, MacIan," said Turnbull, putting him on oneside.
"It's only someone playing the goat.
Let me open thedoor."
But he also picked up a sword as he stepped to open it.
He paused one moment with his hand on the handle and then flungthe door open.
Almost as he did so the ferrule of an ordinarybamboo cane came at his eyes, so that he had actually to parry itwith the naked weapon in his hands.
As the two touched, the pointof the stick was dropped very abruptly, and the man with thestick stepped hurriedly back.
Against the heraldic background of sprawling crimson and goldoffered him by the expiring sunset, the figure of the man withthe stick showed at first merely black and fantastic.
He was asmall man with two wisps of long hair that curled up on eachside, and seen in silhouette, looked like horns.
He had a bow tieso big that the two ends showed on each side of his neck likeunnatural stunted wings.
He had his long black cane still tiltedin his hand like a fencing foil and half presented at the opendoor.
His large straw hat had fallen behind him as he leaptbackwards.
"With reference to your suggestion, MacIan," said Turnbull,placidly, "I think it looks more like the Devil."
"Who on earth are you?"
cried the stranger in a high shrillvoice, brandishing his cane defensively.
"Let me see," said Turnbull, looking round to MacIan with thesame blandness.
"Who are we?"
"Come out," screamed the little man with the stick.
"Certainly," said Turnbull, and went outside with the sword,MacIan following.
Seen more fully, with the evening light on his face, the strangeman looked a little less like a goblin.
He wore a squarepale-grey jacket suit, on which the grey butterfly tie was theonly indisputable touch of affectation.
Against the great sunsethis figure had looked merely small: seen in a more equal light itlooked tolerably compact and shapely.
His reddish-brown hair,combed into two great curls, looked like the long, slow curlinghair of the women in some pre-Raphaelite pictures.
But withinthis feminine frame of hair his face was unexpectedly impudent,like a monkey's.
"What are you doing here?"
he said, in a sharp small voice.
"Well," said MacIan, in his grave childish way, "what are _you_doing here?"
"I," said the man, indignantly, "I'm in my own garden."
"Oh," said MacIan, simply, "I apologize."
Turnbull was coolly curling his red moustache, and the strangerstared from one to the other, temporarily stunned by theirinnocent assurance.
"But, may I ask," he said at last, "what the devil you are doingin my summer-house?"
"Certainly," said MacIan.
"We were just going to fight."
"To fight!"
repeated the man.
"We had better tell this gentleman the whole business," broke inTurnbull.
Then turning to the stranger he said firmly, "I amsorry, sir, but we have something to do that must be done.
And Imay as well tell you at the beginning and to avoid waste of timeor language, that we cannot admit any interference."
"We were just going to take some slight refreshment when youinterrupted us..."The little man had a dawning expression of understanding andstooped and picked up the unused bottle of wine, eyeing itcuriously.
Turnbull continued:"But that refreshment was preparatory to something which I fearyou will find less comprehensible, but on which our minds areentirely fixed, sir.
We are forced to fight a duel.
We are forcedby honour and an internal intellectual need.
Do not, for your ownsake, attempt to stop us.
I know all the excellent and ethicalthings that you will want to say to us.
I know all about theessential requirements of civil order: I have written leadingarticles about them all my life.
I know all about the sacrednessof human life; I have bored all my friends with it.
Try andunderstand our position.
This man and I are alone in the modernworld in that we think that God is essentially important.
I thinkHe does not exist; that is where the importance comes in for me.
But this man thinks that He does exist, and thinking that veryproperly thinks Him more important than anything else.
Now wewish to make a great demonstration and assertion--something thatwill set the world on fire like the first Christian persecutions.
If you like, we are attempting a mutual martyrdom.
The papershave posted up every town against us.
Scotland Yard has fortifiedevery police station with our enemies; we are driven therefore tothe edge of a lonely lane, and indirectly to taking libertieswith your summer-house in order to arrange our...""Stop!"
roared the little man in the butterfly necktie.
"Put meout of my intellectual misery.
Are you really the two tomfools Ihave read of in all the papers?
Are you the two people who wantedto spit each other in the Police Court?
Are you?
Are you?"
"Yes," said MacIan, "it began in a Police Court."
The little man slung the bottle of wine twenty yards away like astone.
"Come up to my place," he said.
"I've got better stuff than that.
I've got the best Beaune within fifty miles of here.
Come up.
You're the very men I wanted to see."
Even Turnbull, with his typical invulnerability, was a littletaken aback by this boisterous and almost brutal hospitality.
"Why...sir..." he began.
"Come up!
Come in!"
howled the little man, dancing with delight.
"I'll give you a dinner.
I'll give you a bed!
I'll give you agreen smooth lawn and your choice of swords and pistols.
Why, youfools, I adore fighting!
It's the only good thing in God's world!
I've walked about these damned fields and longed to see somebodycut up and killed and the blood running.
Ha!
Ha!"
And he made sudden lunges with his stick at the trunk of aneighbouring tree so that the ferrule made fierce prints andpunctures in the bark.
"Excuse me," said MacIan suddenly with the wide-eyed curiosity ofa child, "excuse me, but...""Well?"
said the small fighter, brandishing his wooden weapon.
"Excuse me," repeated MacIan, "but was that what you were doingat the door?"
The little man stared an instant and then said: "Yes," andTurnbull broke into a guffaw.
"Come on!"
cried the little man, tucking his stick under his armand taking quite suddenly to his heels.
"Come on!
Confound me,I'll see both of you eat and then I'll see one of you die.
Lordbless me, the gods must exist after all--they have sent me one ofmy day-dreams!
Lord!
A duel!"
He had gone flying along a winding path between the borders ofthe kitchen garden, and in the increasing twilight he was as hardto follow as a flying hare.
But at length the path after manytwists betrayed its purpose and led abruptly up two or threesteps to the door of a tiny but very clean cottage.
There wasnothing about the outside to distinguish it from other cottages,except indeed its ominous cleanliness and one thing that was outof all the custom and tradition of all cottages under the sun.
In the middle of the little garden among the stocks and marigoldsthere surged up in shapeless stone a South Sea Island idol.
Therewas something gross and even evil in that eyeless and alien godamong the most innocent of the English flowers.
"Come in!"
cried the creature again.
"Come in!
it's betterinside!"
Whether or no it was better inside it was at least a surprise.
The moment the two duellists had pushed open the door of thatinoffensive, whitewashed cottage they found that its interior waslined with fiery gold.
It was like stepping into a chamber in theArabian Nights.
The door that closed behind them shut out Englandand all the energies of the West.
The ornaments that shone andshimmered on every side of them were subtly mixed from manyperiods and lands, but were all oriental.
Cruel Assyrianbas-reliefs ran along the sides of the passage; cruel Turkishswords and daggers glinted above and below them; the two wereseparated by ages and fallen civilizations.
Yet they seemed tosympathize since they were both harmonious and both merciless.
The house seemed to consist of chamber within chamber and createdthat impression as of a dream which belongs also to the ArabianNights themselves.
The innermost room of all was like the insideof a jewel.
The little man who owned it all threw himself on aheap of scarlet and golden cushions and struck his handstogether.
A negro in a white robe and turban appeared suddenlyand silently behind them.
"Selim," said the host, "these two gentlemen are staying with metonight.
Send up the very best wine and dinner at once.
AndSelim, one of these gentlemen will probably die tomorrow.
Makearrangements, please."
The negro bowed and withdrew.
Evan MacIan came out the next morning into the little garden to afresh silver day, his long face looking more austere than ever inthat cold light, his eyelids a little heavy.
He carried one ofthe swords.
Turnbull was in the little house behind him,demolishing the end of an early breakfast and humming a tune tohimself, which could be heard through the open window.
A momentor two later he leapt to his feet and came out into the sunlight,still munching toast, his own sword stuck under his arm like awalking-stick.
Their eccentric host had vanished from sight, with a politegesture, some twenty minutes before.
They imagined him to beoccupied on some concerns in the interior of the house, and theywaited for his emergence, stamping the garden in silence--thegarden of tall, fresh country flowers, in the midst of which themonstrous South Sea idol lifted itself as abruptly as the prow ofa ship riding on a sea of red and white and gold.
It was with a start, therefore, that they came upon the manhimself already in the garden.
They were all the more startledbecause of the still posture in which they found him.
He was onhis knees in front of the stone idol, rigid and motionless, likea saint in a trance or ecstasy.
Yet when Turnbull's tread broke atwig, he was on his feet in a flash.
"Excuse me," he said with an irradiation of smiles, but yet witha kind of bewilderment.
"So sorry...family prayers...oldfashioned...mother's knee.
Let us go on to the lawn behind."
And he ducked rapidly round the statue to an open space of grasson the other side of it.
"This will do us best, Mr. MacIan," said he.
Then he made agesture towards the heavy stone figure on the pedestal which hadnow its blank and shapeless back turned towards them.
"Don't yoube afraid," he added, "he can still see us."
MacIan turned his blue, blinking eyes, which seemed still mistywith sleep (or sleeplessness) towards the idol, but his browsdrew together.
The little man with the long hair also had his eyes on the backview of the god.
His eyes were at once liquid and burning, and herubbed his hands slowly against each other.
"Do you know," he said, "I think he can see us better this way.
I often think that this blank thing is his real face, watching,though it cannot be watched.
He!
he!
Yes, I think he looks nicefrom behind.
He looks more cruel from behind, don't you think?"
"What the devil is the thing?"
asked Turnbull gruffly.
"It is the only Thing there is," answered the other.
"It isForce."
"Oh!"
said Turnbull shortly.
"Yes, my friends," said the little man, with an animatedcountenance, fluttering his fingers in the air, "it was no chancethat led you to this garden; surely it was the caprice of someold god, some happy, pitiless god.
Perhaps it was his will, forhe loves blood; and on that stone in front of him men have beenbutchered by hundreds in the fierce, feasting islands of theSouth.
In this cursed, craven place I have not been permitted tokill men on his altar.
Only rabbits and cats, sometimes."
In the stillness MacIan made a sudden movement, unmeaningapparently, and then remained rigid.
"But today, today," continued the small man in a shrill voice.
"Today his hour is come.
Today his will is done on earth as itis in heaven.
Men, men, men will bleed before him today."
Andhe bit his forefinger in a kind of fever.
Still, the two duellists stood with their swords as heavily asstatues, and the silence seemed to cool the eccentric and callhim back to more rational speech.
"Perhaps I express myself a little too lyrically," he said withan amicable abruptness.
"My philosophy has its higher ecstasies,but perhaps you are hardly worked up to them yet.
Let us confineourselves to the unquestioned.
You have found your way,gentlemen, by a beautiful accident, to the house of the only manin England (probably) who will favour and encourage your mostreasonable project.
From Cornwall to Cape Wrath this county isone horrible, solid block of humanitarianism.
You will find menwho will defend this or that war in a distant continent.
Theywill defend it on the contemptible ground of commerce or the morecontemptible ground of social good.
But do not fancy that youwill find one other person who will comprehend a strong mantaking the sword in his hand and wiping out his enemy.
My nameis Wimpey, Morrice Wimpey.
I had a Fellowship at Magdalen.
But Iassure you I had to drop it, owing to my having said something ina public lecture infringing the popular prejudice against thosegreat gentlemen, the assassins of the Italian Renaissance.
Theylet me say it at dinner and so on, and seemed to like it.
But ina public lecture...so inconsistent.
Well, as I say, here is youronly refuge and temple of honour.
Here you can fall back on thatnaked and awful arbitration which is the only thing that balancesthe stars--a still, continuous violence.
_Vae Victis!_  Down,down, down with the defeated!
Victory is the only ultimate fact.
Carthage _was_ destroyed, the Red Indians are being exterminated:that is the single certainty.
In an hour from now that sun willstill be shining and that grass growing, and one of you will beconquered; one of you will be the conqueror.
When it has beendone, nothing will alter it.
Heroes, I give you the hospitalityfit for heroes.
And I salute the survivor.
Fall on!"
The two men took their swords.
Then MacIan said steadily: "Mr.Turnbull, lend me your sword a moment."
Turnbull, with a questioning glance, handed him the weapon.
MacIan took the second sword in his left hand and, with a violentgesture, hurled it at the feet of little Mr. Wimpey.
"Fight!"
he said in a loud, harsh voice.
"Fight me now!"
Wimpey took a step backward, and bewildered words bubbled on hislips.
"Pick up that sword and fight me," repeated MacIan, with brows asblack as thunder.
The little man turned to Turnbull with a gesture, demandingjudgement or protection.
"Really, sir," he began, "this gentleman confuses...""You stinking little coward," roared Turnbull, suddenly releasinghis wrath.
"Fight, if you're so fond of fighting!
Fight, ifyou're so fond of all that filthy philosophy!
If winning iseverything, go in and win!
If the weak must go to the wall, go tothe wall!
Fight, you rat!
Fight, or if you won't fight--run!"
And he ran at Wimpey, with blazing eyes.
Wimpey staggered back a few paces like a man struggling with hisown limbs.
Then he felt the furious Scotchman coming at him likean express train, doubling his size every second, with eyes asbig as windows and a sword as bright as the sun.
Something brokeinside him, and he found himself running away, tumbling over hisown feet in terror, and crying out as he ran.
"Chase him!"
shouted Turnbull as MacIan snatched up the sword andjoined in the scamper.
"Chase him over a county!
Chase him intothe sea!
Shoo!
Shoo!
Shoo!"
The little man plunged like a rabbit among the tall flowers, thetwo duellists after him.
Turnbull kept at his tail with savageecstasy, still shooing him like a cat.
But MacIan, as he ran pastthe South Sea idol, paused an instant to spring upon itspedestal.
For five seconds he strained against the inert mass.
Then it stirred; and he sent it over with a great crash among theflowers, that engulfed it altogether.
Then he went bounding afterthe runaway.
In the energy of his alarm the ex-Fellow of Magdalen managed toleap the paling of his garden.
The two pursuers went over itafter him like flying birds.
He fled frantically down a long lanewith his two terrors on his trail till he came to a gap in thehedge and went across a steep meadow like the wind.
The twoScotchmen, as they ran, kept up a cheery bellowing and wavedtheir swords.
Up three slanting meadows, down four slantingmeadows on the other side, across another road, across a heath ofsnapping bracken, through a wood, across another road, and to thebrink of a big pool, they pursued the flying philosopher.
Butwhen he came to the pool his pace was so precipitate that hecould not stop it, and with a kind of lurching stagger, he fellsplash into the greasy water.
Getting dripping to his feet, withthe water up to his knees, the worshipper of force and victorywaded disconsolately to the other side and drew himself on to thebank.
And Turnbull sat down on the grass and went off intoreverberations of laughter.
A second afterwards the mostextraordinary grimaces were seen to distort the stiff face ofMacIan, and unholy sounds came from within.
He had neverpractised laughing, and it hurt him very much.
VII.
THE VILLAGE OF GRASSLEY-IN-THE-HOLEAt about half past one, under a strong blue sky, Turnbull got upout of the grass and fern in which he had been lying, and hisstill intermittent laughter ended in a kind of yawn.
"I'm hungry," he said shortly.
"Are you?"
"I have not noticed," answered MacIan.
"What are you going todo?"
"There's a village down the road, past the pool," answeredTurnbull.
"I can see it from here.
I can see the whitewashedwalls of some cottages and a kind of corner of the church.
Howjolly it all looks.
It looks so--I don't know what the wordis--so sensible.
Don't fancy I'm under any illusions aboutArcadian virtue and the innocent villagers.
Men make beasts ofthemselves there with drink, but they don't deliberately makedevils of themselves with mere talking.
They kill wild animals inthe wild woods, but they don't kill cats to the God of Victory.
They don't----"  He broke off and suddenly spat on the ground.
"Excuse me," he said; "it was ceremonial.
One has to get thetaste out of one's mouth."
"The taste of what?"
asked MacIan.
"I don't know the exact name for it," replied Turnbull.
"Perhapsit is the South Sea Islands, or it may be Magdalen College."
There was a long pause, and MacIan also lifted his large limbsoff the ground--his eyes particularly dreamy.
"I know what you mean, Turnbull," he said, "but...I alwaysthought you people agreed with all that."
"With all that about doing as one likes, and the individual, andNature loving the strongest, and all the things which thatcockroach talked about."
Turnbull's big blue-grey eyes stood open with a graveastonishment.
"Do you really mean to say, MacIan," he said, "that you fanciedthat we, the Free-thinkers, that Bradlaugh, or Holyoake, orIngersoll, believe all that dirty, immoral mysticism aboutNature?
Damn Nature!"
"I supposed you did," said MacIan calmly.
"It seems to me yourmost conclusive position."
"And you mean to tell me," rejoined the other, "that you broke mywindow, and challenged me to mortal combat, and tied a tradesmanup with ropes, and chased an Oxford Fellow across fivemeadows--all under the impression that I am such an illiterateidiot as to believe in Nature!"
"I supposed you did," repeated MacIan with his usual mildness;"but I admit that I know little of the details of your belief--ordisbelief."
Turnbull swung round quite suddenly, and set off towards thevillage.
"Come along," he cried.
"Come down to the village.
Come down tothe nearest decent inhabitable pub.
This is a case for beer."
"I do not quite follow you," said the Highlander.
"Yes, you do," answered Turnbull.
"You follow me slap into theinn-parlour.
I repeat, this is a case for beer.
We must have thewhole of this matter out thoroughly before we go a step farther.
Do you know that an idea has just struck me of great simplicityand of some cogency.
Do not by any means let us drop ourintentions of settling our differences with two steel swords.
But do you not think that with two pewter pots we might do whatwe really have never thought of doing yet--discover what ourdifference is?"
"It never occurred to me before," answered MacIan withtranquillity.
"It is a good suggestion."
And they set out at an easy swing down the steep road to thevillage of Grassley-in-the-Hole.
Grassley-in-the-Hole was a rude parallelogram of buildings, withtwo thoroughfares which might have been called two high streetsif it had been possible to call them streets.
One of these wayswas higher on the slope than the other, the whole parallelogramlying aslant, so to speak, on the side of the hill.
The upper ofthese two roads was decorated with a big public house, abutcher's shop, a small public house, a sweetstuff shop, a verysmall public house, and an illegible signpost.
The lower of thetwo roads boasted a horse-pond, a post office, a gentleman'sgarden with very high hedges, a microscopically small publichouse, and two cottages.
Where all the people lived who supportedall the public houses was in this, as in many other Englishvillages, a silent and smiling mystery.
The church lay a littleabove and beyond the village, with a square grey tower dominatingit decisively.
But even the church was scarcely so central and solemn aninstitution as the large public house, the Valencourt Arms.
Itwas named after some splendid family that had long gone bankrupt,and whose seat was occupied by a man who had invented a hygienicbootjack; but the unfathomable sentimentalism of the Englishpeople insisted in regarding the Inn, the seat and the sitter init, as alike parts of a pure and marmoreal antiquity.
And in theValencourt Arms festivity itself had some solemnity and decorum;and beer was drunk with reverence, as it ought to be.
Into theprincipal parlour of this place entered two strangers, who foundthemselves, as is always the case in such hostels, the object,not of fluttered curiosity or pert inquiry, but of steady,ceaseless, devouring ocular study.
They had long coats down totheir heels, and carried under each coat something that lookedlike a stick.
One was tall and dark, the other short andred-haired.
They ordered a pot of ale each.
"MacIan," said Turnbull, lifting his tankard, "the fool whowanted us to be friends made us want to go on fighting.
It isonly natural that the fool who wanted us to fight should make usfriendly.
MacIan, your health!"
Dusk was already dropping, the rustics in the tavern were alreadylurching and lumbering out of it by twos and threes, cryingclamorous good nights to a solitary old toper that remained,before MacIan and Turnbull had reached the really important partof their discussion.
MacIan wore an expression of sad bewilderment not uncommon withhim.
"I am to understand, then," he said, "that you don't believein nature."
"You may say so in a very special and emphatic sense," saidTurnbull.
"I do not believe in nature, just as I do not believein Odin.
She is a myth.
It is not merely that I do not believethat nature can guide us.
It is that I do not believe that natureexists."
"Exists?"
said MacIan in his monotonous way, settling his pewterpot on the table.
"Yes, in a real sense nature does not exist.
I mean that nobodycan discover what the original nature of things would have beenif things had not interfered with it.
The first blade of grassbegan to tear up the earth and eat it; it was interfering withnature, if there is any nature.
The first wild ox began to tearup the grass and eat it; he was interfering with nature, if thereis any nature.
In the same way," continued Turnbull, "the humanwhen it asserts its dominance over nature is just as natural asthe thing which it destroys."
"And in the same way," said MacIan almost dreamily, "thesuperhuman, the supernatural is just as natural as the naturewhich it destroys."
Turnbull took his head out of his pewter pot in some anger.
"The supernatural, of course," he said, "is quite another thing;the case of the supernatural is simple.
The supernatural does notexist."
"Quite so," said MacIan in a rather dull voice; "you said thesame about the natural.
If the natural does not exist thesupernatural obviously can't."
And he yawned a little over hisale.
Turnbull turned for some reason a little red and remarkedquickly, "That may be jolly clever, for all I know.
But everyonedoes know that there is a division between the things that as amatter of fact do commonly happen and the things that don't.
Things that break the evident laws of nature----""Which does not exist," put in MacIan sleepily.
Turnbull struckthe table with a sudden hand.
"Good Lord in heaven!"
he cried----"Who does not exist," murmured MacIan.
"Good Lord in heaven!"
thundered Turnbull, without regarding theinterruption.
"Do you really mean to sit there and say that you,like anybody else, would not recognize the difference between anatural occurrence and a supernatural one--if there could be sucha thing?
If I flew up to the ceiling----""You would bump your head badly," cried MacIan, suddenly startingup.
"One can't talk of this kind of thing under a ceiling at all.
Come outside!
Come outside and ascend into heaven!"
He burst the door open on a blue abyss of evening and theystepped out into it: it was suddenly and strangely cool.
"Turnbull," said MacIan, "you have said some things so true andsome so false that I want to talk; and I will try to talk so thatyou understand.
For at present you do not understand at all.
Wedon't seem to mean the same things by the same words."
He stood silent for a second or two and then resumed.
"A minute or two ago I caught you out in a real contradiction.
Atthat moment logically I was right.
And at that moment I knew Iwas wrong.
Yes, there is a real difference between the naturaland the supernatural: if you flew up into that blue sky thisinstant, I should think that you were moved by God--or the devil.
But if you want to know what I really think...I must explain."
He stopped again, abstractedly boring the point of his sword intothe earth, and went on:"I was born and bred and taught in a complete universe.
Thesupernatural was not natural, but it was perfectly reasonable.
Nay, the supernatural to me is more reasonable than the natural;for the supernatural is a direct message from God, who is reason.
I was taught that some things are natural and some things divine.
I mean that some things are mechanical and some things divine.
But there is the great difficulty, Turnbull.
The great difficultyis that, according to my teaching, you are divine."
"Me!
Divine?"
said Turnbull truculently.
"What do you mean?"
"That is just the difficulty," continued MacIan thoughtfully.
"Iwas told that there was a difference between the grass and aman's will; and the difference was that a man's will was specialand divine.
A man's free will, I heard, was supernatural."
"Rubbish!"
said Turnbull.
"Oh," said MacIan patiently, "then if a man's free will isn'tsupernatural, why do your materialists deny that it exists?"
Turnbull was silent for a moment.
Then he began to speak, butMacIan continued with the same steady voice and sad eyes:"So what I feel is this: Here is the great divine creation I wastaught to believe in.
I can understand your disbelieving in it,but why disbelieve in a part of it?
It was all one thing to me.
God had authority because he was God.
Man had authority becausehe was man.
You cannot prove that God is better than a man; norcan you prove that a man is better than a horse.
Why permit anyordinary thing?
Why do you let a horse be saddled?"
"Some modern thinkers disapprove of it," said Turnbull a littledoubtfully.
"I know," said MacIan grimly; "that man who talked about love,for instance."
Turnbull made a humorous grimace; then he said: "We seem to betalking in a kind of shorthand; but I won't pretend not tounderstand you.
What you mean is this: that you learnt about allyour saints and angels at the same time as you learnt aboutcommon morality, from the same people, in the same way.
And youmean to say that if one may be disputed, so may the other.
Well,let that pass for the moment.
But let me ask you a question inturn.
Did not this system of yours, which you swallowed whole,contain all sorts of things that were merely local, the respectfor the chief of your clan, or such things; the village ghost,the family feud, or what not?
Did you not take in those things,too, along with your theology?"
MacIan stared along the dim village road, down which the laststraggler from the inn was trailing his way.
"What you say is not unreasonable," he said.
"But it is not quitetrue.
The distinction between the chief and us did exist; but itwas never anything like the distinction between the human and thedivine, or the human and the animal.
It was more like thedistinction between one animal and another.
But----""Well?"
said Turnbull.
MacIan was silent.
"Go on," repeated Turnbull; "what's the matter with you?
What areyou staring at?"
"I am staring," said MacIan at last, "at that which shall judgeus both."
"Oh, yes," said Turnbull in a tired way, "I suppose you meanGod."
"No, I don't," said MacIan, shaking his head.
"I mean him."
And he pointed to the half-tipsy yokel who was ploughing down theroad.
"What do you mean?"
asked the atheist.
"I mean him," repeated MacIan with emphasis.
"He goes out in theearly dawn; he digs or he ploughs a field.
Then he comes back anddrinks ale, and then he sings a song.
All your philosophies andpolitical systems are young compared to him.
All your hoarycathedrals, yes, even the Eternal Church on earth is new comparedto him.
The most mouldering gods in the British Museum are newfacts beside him.
It is he who in the end shall judge us all."
And MacIan rose to his feet with a vague excitement.
"What are you going to do?"
"I am going to ask him," cried MacIan, "which of us is right."
Turnbull broke into a kind of laugh.
"Ask that intoxicatedturnip-eater----" he began.
"Yes--which of us is right," cried MacIan violently.
"Oh, youhave long words and I have long words; and I talk of every manbeing the image of God; and you talk of every man being a citizenand enlightened enough to govern.
But if every man typifies God,there is God.
If every man is an enlightened citizen, there isyour enlightened citizen.
The first man one meets is always man.
Let us catch him up."
And in gigantic strides the long, lean Highlander whirled awayinto the grey twilight, Turnbull following with a good-humouredoath.
The track of the rustic was easy to follow, even in the falteringdark; for he was enlivening his wavering walk with song.
It wasan interminable poem, beginning with some unspecified KingWilliam, who (it appeared) lived in London town and who after thesecond rise vanished rather abruptly from the train of thought.
The rest was almost entirely about beer and was thick with localtopography of a quite unrecognizable kind.
The singer's step wasneither very rapid, nor, indeed, exceptionally secure; so thesong grew louder and louder and the two soon overtook him.
He was a man elderly or rather of any age, with lean grey hairand a lean red face, but with that remarkable rustic physiognomyin which it seems that all the features stand out independentlyfrom the face; the rugged red nose going out like a limb; thebleared blue eyes standing out like signals.
He gave them greeting with the elaborate urbanity of the slightlyintoxicated.
MacIan, who was vibrating with one of his silent,violent decisions, opened the question without delay.
Heexplained the philosophic position in words as short and simpleas possible.
But the singular old man with the lank red faceseemed to think uncommonly little of the short words.
He fixedwith a fierce affection upon one or two of the long ones.
"Atheists!"
he repeated with luxurious scorn.
"Atheists!
Iknow their sort, master.
Atheists!
Don't talk to me about 'un.
Atheists!"
The grounds of his disdain seemed a little dark and confused; butthey were evidently sufficient.
MacIan resumed in someencouragement:"You think as I do, I hope; you think that a man should beconnected with the Church; with the common Christian----"The old man extended a quivering stick in the direction of adistant hill.
"There's the church," he said thickly.
"Grassley old church thatis.
Pulled down it was, in the old squire's time, and----""I mean," explained MacIan elaborately, "that you think thatthere should be someone typifying religion, a priest----""Priests!"
said the old man with sudden passion.
"Priests!
Iknow 'un.
What they want in England?
That's what I say.
Whatthey want in England?"
"They want you," said MacIan.
"Quite so," said Turnbull, "and me; but they won't get us.
MacIan, your attempt on the primitive innocence does not seemvery successful.
Let me try.
What you want, my friend, is yourrights.
You don't want any priests or churches.
A vote, a rightto speak is what you----""Who says I a'n't got a right to speak?"
said the old man, facinground in an irrational frenzy.
"I got a right to speak.
I'm aman, I am.
I don't want no votin' nor priests.
I say a man's aman; that's what I say.
If a man a'n't a man, what is he?
That'swhat I say, if a man a'n't a man, what is he?
When I sees a man,I sez 'e's a man."
"Quite so," said Turnbull, "a citizen."
"I say he's a man," said the rustic furiously, stopping andstriking his stick on the ground.
"Not a city or owt else.
He's aman."
"You're perfectly right," said the sudden voice of MacIan,falling like a sword.
"And you have kept close to something thewhole world of today tries to forget."
"Good night."
And the old man went on wildly singing into the night.
"A jolly old creature," said Turnbull; "he didn't seem able toget much beyond that fact that a man is a man."
"Has anybody got beyond it?"
asked MacIan.
Turnbull looked at him curiously.
"Are you turning an agnostic?"
he asked.
"Oh, you do not understand!"
cried out MacIan.
"We Catholics areall agnostics.
We Catholics have only in that sense got as far asrealizing that man is a man.
But your Ibsens and your Zolas andyour Shaws and your Tolstoys have not even got so far."
VIII.
AN INTERLUDE OF ARGUMENTMorning broke in bitter silver along the grey and level plain;and almost as it did so Turnbull and MacIan came out of a low,scrubby wood on to the empty and desolate flats.
They had walkedall night.
They had walked all night and talked all night also, and if thesubject had been capable of being exhausted they would haveexhausted it.
Their long and changing argument had taken themthrough districts and landscapes equally changing.
They haddiscussed Haeckel upon hills so high and steep that in spite ofthe coldness of the night it seemed as if the stars might burnthem.
They had explained and re-explained the Massacre of St.Bartholomew in little white lanes walled in with standing corn aswith walls of gold.
They had talked about Mr. Kensit in dim andtwinkling pine woods, amid the bewildering monotony of the pines.
And it was with the end of a long speech from MacIan,passionately defending the practical achievements and the solidprosperity of the Catholic tradition, that they came out upon theopen land.
MacIan had learnt much and thought more since he came out of thecloudy hills of Arisaig.
He had met many typical modern figuresunder circumstances which were sharply symbolic; and, moreover,he had absorbed the main modern atmosphere from the mere presenceand chance phrases of Turnbull, as such atmospheres can always beabsorbed from the presence and the phrases of any man of greatmental vitality.
He had at last begun thoroughly to understandwhat are the grounds upon which the mass of the modern worldsolidly disapprove of her creed; and he threw himself intoreplying to them with a hot intellectual enjoyment.
"I begin to understand one or two of your dogmas, Mr. Turnbull,"he had said emphatically as they ploughed heavily up a woodedhill.
"And every one that I understand I deny.
Take any one ofthem you like.
You hold that your heretics and sceptics havehelped the world forward and handed on a lamp of progress.
I denyit.
Nothing is plainer from real history than that each of yourheretics invented a complete cosmos of his own which the nextheretic smashed entirely to pieces.
Who knows now exactly whatNestorius taught?
Who cares?
There are only two things that weknow for certain about it.
The first is that Nestorius, as aheretic, taught something quite opposite to the teaching ofArius, the heretic who came before him, and something quiteuseless to James Turnbull, the heretic who comes after.
I defyyou to go back to the Free-thinkers of the past and find anyhabitation for yourself at all.
I defy you to read Godwin orShelley or the deists of the eighteenth century of thenature-worshipping humanists of the Renaissance, withoutdiscovering that you differ from them twice as much as you differfrom the Pope.
You are a nineteenth-century sceptic, and you arealways telling me that I ignore the cruelty of nature.
If you hadbeen an eighteenth-century sceptic you would have told me that Iignore the kindness and benevolence of nature.
You are anatheist, and you praise the deists of the eighteenth century.
Read them instead of praising them, and you will find that theirwhole universe stands or falls with the deity.
You are amaterialist, and you think Bruno a scientific hero.
See what hesaid and you will think him an insane mystic.
No, the greatFree-thinker, with his genuine ability and honesty, does not inpractice destroy Christianity.
What he does destroy is theFree-thinker who went before.
Free-thought may be suggestive, itmay be inspiriting, it may have as much as you please of themerits that come from vivacity and variety.
But there is onething Free-thought can never be by any possibility--Free-thoughtcan never be progressive.
It can never be progressive because itwill accept nothing from the past; it begins every time againfrom the beginning; and it goes every time in a differentdirection.
All the rational philosophers have gone alongdifferent roads, so it is impossible to say which has gonefarthest.
Who can discuss whether Emerson was a better optimistthan Schopenhauer was pessimist?
It is like asking if this cornis as yellow as that hill is steep.
No; there are only two thingsthat really progress; and they both accept accumulations ofauthority.
They may be progressing uphill and down; they may begrowing steadily better or steadily worse; but they have steadilyincreased in certain definable matters; they have steadilyadvanced in a certain definable direction; they are the only twothings, it seems, that ever _can_ progress.
The first is strictlyphysical science.
The second is the Catholic Church."
"Physical science and the Catholic Church!"
said Turnbullsarcastically; "and no doubt the first owes a great deal to thesecond."
"If you pressed that point I might reply that it was veryprobable," answered MacIan calmly.
"I often fancy that yourhistorical generalizations rest frequently on random instances; Ishould not be surprised if your vague notions of the Church asthe persecutor of science was a generalization from Galileo.
Ishould not be at all surprised if, when you counted thescientific investigations and discoveries since the fall of Rome,you found that a great mass of them had been made by monks.
Butthe matter is irrelevant to my meaning.
I say that if you want anexample of anything which has progressed in the moral world bythe same method as science in the material world, by continuallyadding to without unsettling what was there before, then I saythat there _is_ only one example of it.
And that is Us."
"With this enormous difference," said Turnbull, "that howeverelaborate be the calculations of physical science, their netresult can be tested.
Granted that it took millions of books Inever read and millions of men I never heard of to discover theelectric light.
Still I can see the electric light.
But I cannotsee the supreme virtue which is the result of all your theologiesand sacraments."
"Catholic virtue is often invisible because it is the normal,"answered MacIan.
"Christianity is always out of fashion becauseit is always sane; and all fashions are mild insanities.
WhenItaly is mad on art the Church seems too Puritanical; whenEngland is mad on Puritanism the Church seems too artistic.
Whenyou quarrel with us now you class us with kingship and despotism;but when you quarrelled with us first it was because we would notaccept the divine despotism of Henry VIII.
The Church alwaysseems to be behind the times, when it is really beyond the times;it is waiting till the last fad shall have seen its last summer.
It keeps the key of a permanent virtue."
"Oh, I have heard all that!"
said Turnbull with genial contempt.
"I have heard that Christianity keeps the key of virtue, and thatif you read Tom Paine you will cut your throat at Monte Carlo.
Itis such rubbish that I am not even angry at it.
You say thatChristianity is the prop of morals; but what more do you do?
Whena doctor attends you and could poison you with a pinch of salt,do you ask whether he is a Christian?
You ask whether he is agentleman, whether he is an M.D.--anything but that.
When asoldier enlists to die for his country or disgrace it, do you askwhether he is a Christian?
You are more likely to ask whether heis Oxford or Cambridge at the boat race.
If you think your creedessential to morals why do you not make it a test for thesethings?"
"We once did make it a test for these things," said MacIansmiling, "and then you told us that we were imposing by force afaith unsupported by argument.
It seems rather hard that havingfirst been told that our creed must be false because we did usetests, we should now be told that it must be false because wedon't.
But I notice that most anti-Christian arguments are in thesame inconsistent style."
"That is all very well as a debating-club answer," repliedTurnbull good-humouredly, "but the question still remains: Whydon't you confine yourself more to Christians if Christians arethe only really good men?"
"Who talked of such folly?"
asked MacIan disdainfully.
"Do yousuppose that the Catholic Church ever held that Christians werethe only good men?
Why, the Catholics of the Catholic Middle Agestalked about the virtues of all the virtuous Pagans untilhumanity was sick of the subject.
No, if you really want to knowwhat we mean when we say that Christianity has a special power ofvirtue, I will tell you.
The Church is the only thing on earththat can perpetuate a type of virtue and make it something morethan a fashion.
The thing is so plain and historical that Ihardly think you will ever deny it.
You cannot deny that it isperfectly possible that tomorrow morning, in Ireland or in Italy,there might appear a man not only as good but good in exactly thesame way as St. Francis of Assisi.
Very well, now take the othertypes of human virtue; many of them splendid.
The Englishgentleman of Elizabeth was chivalrous and idealistic.
But can youstand still here in this meadow and _be_ an English gentleman ofElizabeth?
The austere republican of the eighteenth century, withhis stern patriotism and his simple life, was a fine fellow.
Buthave you ever seen him?
have you ever seen an austere republican?
Only a hundred years have passed and that volcano ofrevolutionary truth and valour is as cold as the mountains of themoon.
And so it is and so it will be with the ethics which arebuzzing down Fleet Street at this instant as I speak.
What phrasewould inspire the London clerk or workman just now?
Perhaps thathe is a son of the British Empire on which the sun never sets;perhaps that he is a prop of his Trades Union, or aclass-conscious proletarian something or other; perhaps merelythat he is a gentleman when he obviously is not.
Those names andnotions are all honourable; but how long will they last?
Empiresbreak; industrial conditions change; the suburbs will not lastfor ever.
What will remain?
I will tell you.
The Catholic Saintwill remain."
"And suppose I don't like him?"
said Turnbull.
"On my theory the question is rather whether he will like you: ormore probably whether he will ever have heard of you.
But I grantthe reasonableness of your query.
You have a right, if you speakas the ordinary man, to ask if you will like the saint.
But asthe ordinary man you do like him.
You revel in him.
If youdislike him it is not because you are a nice ordinary man, butbecause you are (if you will excuse me) a sophisticated prig of aFleet Street editor.
That is just the funny part of it.
The humanrace has always admired the Catholic virtues, however little itcan practise them; and oddly enough it has admired most those ofthem that the modern world most sharply disputes.
You complain ofCatholicism for setting up an ideal of virginity; it did nothingof the kind.
The whole human race set up an ideal of virginity;the Greeks in Athene, the Romans in the Vestal fire, set up anideal of virginity.
What then is your real quarrel withCatholicism?
Your quarrel can only be, your quarrel really onlyis, that Catholicism has _achieved_ an ideal of virginity; thatit is no longer a mere piece of floating poetry.
But if you, anda few feverish men, in top hats, running about in a street inLondon, choose to differ as to the ideal itself, not only fromthe Church, but from the Parthenon whose name means virginity,from the Roman Empire which went outwards from the virgin flame,from the whole legend and tradition of Europe, from the lion whowill not touch virgins, from the unicorn who respects them, andwho make up together the bearers of your own national shield,from the most living and lawless of your own poets, fromMassinger, who wrote the _Virgin Martyr_, from Shakespeare, whowrote _Measure for Measure_--if you in Fleet Street differ fromall this human experience, does it never strike you that it maybe Fleet Street that is wrong?"
"No," answered Turnbull; "I trust that I am sufficientlyfair-minded to canvass and consider the idea; but havingconsidered it, I think Fleet Street is right, yes--even if theParthenon is wrong.
I think that as the world goes on newpsychological atmospheres are generated, and in these atmospheresit is possible to find delicacies and combinations which in othertimes would have to be represented by some ruder symbol.
Everyman feels the need of some element of purity in sex; perhaps theycan only typify purity as the absence of sex.
You will laugh if Isuggest that we may have made in Fleet Street an atmosphere inwhich a man can be so passionate as Sir Lancelot and as pure asSir Galahad.
But, after all, we have in the modern world erectedmany such atmospheres.
We have, for instance, a new andimaginative appreciation of children."
"Quite so," replied MacIan with a singular smile.
"It has beenvery well put by one of the brightest of your young authors, whosaid: 'Unless you become as little children ye shall in no wiseenter the kingdom of heaven.'
But you are quite right; there is amodern worship of children.
And what, I ask you, is this modernworship of children?
What, in the name of all the angels anddevils, is it except a worship of virginity?
Why should anyoneworship a thing merely because it is small or immature?
No; youhave tried to escape from this thing, and the very thing youpoint to as the goal of your escape is only the thing again.
AmI wrong in saying that these things seem to be eternal?"
And it was with these words that they came in sight of the greatplains.
They went a little way in silence, and then JamesTurnbull said suddenly, "But I _cannot_ believe in the thing."
MacIan answered nothing to the speech; perhaps it isunanswerable.
And indeed they scarcely spoke another word toeach other all that day.
IX.
THE STRANGE LADYMoonrise with a great and growing moon opened over all thoseflats, making them seem flatter and larger than they were,turning them to a lake of blue light.
The two companions trudgedacross the moonlit plain for half an hour in full silence.
ThenMacIan stopped suddenly and planted his sword-point in the groundlike one who plants his tent-pole for the night.
Leaving itstanding there, he clutched his black-haired skull with his greatclaws of hands, as was his custom when forcing the pace of hisbrain.
Then his hands dropped again and he spoke.
"I'm sure you're thinking the same as I am," he said; "how longare we to be on this damned seesaw?"
The other did not answer, but his silence seemed somehow solid asassent; and MacIan went on conversationally.
Neither noticed thatboth had instinctively stood still before the sign of the fixedand standing sword.
"It is hard to guess what God means in this business.
But hemeans something--or the other thing, or both.
Whenever we havetried to fight each other something has stopped us.
Whenever wehave tried to be reconciled to each other, something has stoppedus again.
By the run of our luck we have never had time to beeither friends or enemies.
Something always jumped out of thebushes."
Turnbull nodded gravely and glanced round at the huge andhedgeless meadow which fell away towards the horizon into aglimmering high road.
"Nothing will jump out of bushes here anyhow," he said.
"That is what I meant," said MacIan, and stared steadily at theheavy hilt of his standing sword, which in the slight wind swayedon its tempered steel like some huge thistle on its stalk.
"That is what I meant; we are quite alone here.
I have not hearda horse-hoof or a footstep or the hoot of a train for miles.
So Ithink we might stop here and ask for a miracle."
"Oh!
might we?"
said the atheistic editor with a sort of gusto ofdisgust.
"I beg your pardon," said MacIan, meekly.
"I forgot yourprejudices."
He eyed the wind-swung sword-hilt in sad meditationand resumed: "What I mean is, we might find out in this quietplace whether there really is any fate or any commandment againstour enterprise.
I will engage on my side, like Elijah, to accepta test from heaven.
Turnbull, let us draw swords here in thismoonlight and this monstrous solitude.
And if here in thismoonlight and solitude there happens anything to interrupt us--ifit be lightning striking our sword-blades or a rabbit runningunder our legs--I will take it as a sign from God and we willshake hands for ever."
Turnbull's mouth twitched in angry humour under his redmoustache.
He said: "I will wait for signs from God until I haveany signs of His existence; but God--or Fate--forbid that a manof scientific culture should refuse any kind of experiment."
"Very well, then," said MacIan, shortly.
"We are more quiet herethan anywhere else; let us engage."
And he plucked hissword-point out of the turf.
Turnbull regarded him for a second and a half with a bafflingvisage almost black against the moonrise; then his hand made asharp movement to his hip and his sword shone in the moon.
As old chess-players open every game with established gambits,they opened with a thrust and parry, orthodox and even franklyineffectual.
But in MacIan's soul more formless storms weregathering, and he made a lunge or two so savage as first tosurprise and then to enrage his opponent.
Turnbull ground histeeth, kept his temper, and waiting for the third lunge, and theworst, had almost spitted the lunger when a shrill, small crycame from behind him, a cry such as is not made by any of thebeasts that perish.
Turnbull must have been more superstitious than he knew, for hestopped in the act of going forward.
MacIan was brazenlysuperstitious, and he dropped his sword.
After all, he hadchallenged the universe to send an interruption; and this was aninterruption, whatever else it was.
An instant afterwards thesharp, weak cry was repeated.
This time it was certain that itwas human and that it was female.
MacIan stood rolling those great blue Gaelic eyes that contrastedwith his dark hair.
"It is the voice of God," he said again andagain.
"God hasn't got much of a voice," said Turnbull, who snatched atevery chance of cheap profanity.
"As a matter of fact, MacIan, itisn't the voice of God, but it's something a jolly sight moreimportant--it is the voice of man--or rather of woman.
So I thinkwe'd better scoot in its direction."
MacIan snatched up his fallen weapon without a word, and the tworaced away towards that part of the distant road from which thecry was now constantly renewed.
They had to run over a curve of country that looked smooth butwas very rough; a neglected field which they soon found to befull of the tallest grasses and the deepest rabbit-holes.
Moreover, that great curve of the countryside which looked soslow and gentle when you glanced over it, proved to be highlyprecipitous when you scampered over it; and Turnbull was twicenearly flung on his face.
MacIan, though much heavier, avoidedsuch an overthrow only by having the quick and incalculable feetof the mountaineer; but both of them may be said to have leaptoff a low cliff when they leapt into the road.
The moonlight lay on the white road with a more naked andelectric glare than on the grey-green upland, and though thescene which it revealed was complicated, it was not difficult toget its first features at a glance.
A small but very neat black-and-yellow motor-car was standingstolidly, slightly to the left of the road.
A somewhat largerlight-green motor-car was tipped half-way into a ditch on thesame side, and four flushed and staggering men in evening dresswere tipped out of it.
Three of them were standing about theroad, giving their opinions to the moon with vague but echoingviolence.
The fourth, however, had already advanced on thechauffeur of the black-and-yellow car, and was threatening himwith a stick.
The chauffeur had risen to defend himself.
Byhis side sat a young lady.
She was sitting bolt upright, a slender and rigid figure grippingthe sides of her seat, and her first few cries had ceased.
Shewas clad in close-fitting dark costume, a mass of warm brown hairwent out in two wings or waves on each side of her forehead; andeven at that distance it could be seen that her profile was ofthe aquiline and eager sort, like a young falcon hardly free ofthe nest.
Turnbull had concealed in him somewhere a fund of common senseand knowledge of the world of which he himself and his bestfriends were hardly aware.
He was one of those who take in muchof the shows of things absent-mindedly, and in an irrelevantreverie.
As he stood at the door of his editorial shop on LudgateHill and meditated on the non-existence of God, he silentlyabsorbed a good deal of varied knowledge about the existence ofmen.
He had come to know types by instinct and dilemmas with aglance; he saw the crux of the situation in the road, and what hesaw made him redouble his pace.
He knew that the men were rich; he knew that they were drunk; andhe knew, what was worst of all, that they were fundamentallyfrightened.
And he knew this also, that no common ruffian (suchas attacks ladies in novels) is ever so savage and ruthless as acoarse kind of gentleman when he is really alarmed.
The reason isnot recondite; it is simply because the police-court is not sucha menacing novelty to the poor ruffian as it is to the rich.
Whenthey came within hail and heard the voices, they confirmed allTurnbull's anticipations.
The man in the middle of the road wasshouting in a hoarse and groggy voice that the chauffeur hadsmashed their car on purpose; that they must get to the Cri thatevening, and that he would jolly well have to take them there.
The chauffeur had mildly objected that he was driving a lady.
"Oh!
we'll take care of the lady," said the red-faced young man,and went off into gurgling and almost senile laughter.
By the time the two champions came up, things had grown moreserious.
The intoxication of the man talking to the chauffeur hadtaken one of its perverse and catlike jumps into mere screamingspite and rage.
He lifted his stick and struck at the chauffeur,who caught hold of it, and the drunkard fell backwards, dragginghim out of his seat on the car.
Another of the rowdies rushedforward booing in idiot excitement, fell over the chauffeur, and,either by accident or design, kicked him as he lay.
The drunkardgot to his feet again; but the chauffeur did not.
The man who had kicked kept a kind of half-witted conscience orcowardice, for he stood staring at the senseless body andmurmuring words of inconsequent self-justification, makinggestures with his hands as if he were arguing with somebody.
Butthe other three, with a mere whoop and howl of victory, wereboarding the car on three sides at once.
It was exactly at thismoment that Turnbull fell among them like one fallen from thesky.
He tore one of the climbers backward by the collar, and witha hearty push sent him staggering over into the ditch upon hisnose.
One of the remaining two, who was too far gone to noticeanything, continued to clamber ineffectually over the high backof the car, kicking and pouring forth a rivulet of soliloquy.
Butthe other dropped at the interruption, turned upon Turnbull andbegan a battering bout of fisticuffs.
At the same moment the mancrawled out of the ditch in a masquerade of mud and rushed at hisold enemy from behind.
The whole had not taken a second; and aninstant after MacIan was in the midst of them.
Turnbull had tossed away his sheathed sword, greatly preferringhis hands, except in the avowed etiquette of the duel; for he hadlearnt to use his hands in the old street-battles of Bradlaugh.
But to MacIan the sword even sheathed was a more natural weapon,and he laid about him on all sides with it as with a stick.
Theman who had the walking-stick found his blows parried withpromptitude; and a second after, to his great astonishment, foundhis own stick fly up in the air as by a conjuring trick, with aturn of the swordsman's wrist.
Another of the revellers pickedthe stick out of the ditch and ran in upon MacIan, calling to hiscompanion to assist him.
"I haven't got a stick," grumbled the disarmed man, and lookedvaguely about the ditch.
"Perhaps," said MacIan, politely, "you would like this one."
Withthe word the drunkard found his hand that had grasped the sticksuddenly twisted and empty; and the stick lay at the feet of hiscompanion on the other side of the road.
MacIan felt a faint stirbehind him; the girl had risen to her feet and was leaningforward to stare at the fighters.
Turnbull was still engaged incountering and pommelling with the third young man.
The fourthyoung man was still engaged with himself, kicking his legs inhelpless rotation on the back of the car and talking withmelodious rationality.
At length Turnbull's opponent began to back before the battery ofhis heavy hands, still fighting, for he was the soberest andboldest of the four.
If these are annals of military glory, it isdue to him to say that he need not have abandoned the conflict;only that as he backed to the edge of the ditch his foot caughtin a loop of grass and he went over in a flat and comfortableposition from which it took him a considerable time to rise.
Bythe time he had risen, Turnbull had come to the rescue of MacIan,who was at bay but belabouring his two enemies handsomely.
Thesight of the liberated reserve was to them like that of Blucherat Waterloo; the two set off at a sullen trot down the road,leaving even the walking-stick lying behind them in themoonlight.
MacIan plucked the struggling and aspiring idiot offthe back of the car like a stray cat, and left him swayingunsteadily in the moon.
Then he approached the front part of thecar in a somewhat embarrassed manner and pulled off his cap.
For some solid seconds the lady and he merely looked at eachother, and MacIan had an irrational feeling of being in a picturehung on a wall.
That is, he was motionless, even lifeless, andyet staringly significant, like a picture.
The white moonlight onthe road, when he was not looking at it, gave him a vision of theroad being white with snow.
The motor-car, when he was notlooking at it, gave him a rude impression of a captured coach inthe old days of highwaymen.
And he whose whole soul was with theswords and stately manners of the eighteenth century, he who wasa Jacobite risen from the dead, had an overwhelming sense ofbeing once more in the picture, when he had so long been out ofthe picture.
In that short and strong silence he absorbed the lady from headto foot.
He had never really looked at a human being before inhis life.
He saw her face and hair first, then that she had longsuede gloves; then that there was a fur cap at the back of herbrown hair.
He might, perhaps, be excused for this hungryattention.
He had prayed that some sign might come from heaven;and after an almost savage scrutiny he came to the conclusionthat his one did.
The lady's instantaneous arrest of speechmight need more explaining; but she may well have been stunnedwith the squalid attack and the abrupt rescue.
Yet it was shewho remembered herself first and suddenly called out withself-accusing horror:"Oh, that poor, poor man!"
They both swung round abruptly and saw that Turnbull, with hisrecovered sword under his arm-pit, was already lifting the fallenchauffeur into the car.
He was only stunned and was slowlyawakening, feebly waving his left arm.
The lady in long gloves and the fur cap leapt out and ran rapidlytowards them, only to be reassured by Turnbull, who (unlike manyof his school) really knew a little science when he invoked it toredeem the world.
"He's all right," said he; "he's quite safe.
But I'm afraid he won't be able to drive the car for half an houror so."
"I can drive the car," said the young woman in the fur cap withstony practicability.
"Oh, in that case," began MacIan, uneasily; and that paralysingshyness which is a part of romance induced him to make a backwardmovement as if leaving her to herself.
But Turnbull was morerational than he, being more indifferent.
"I don't think you ought to drive home alone, ma'am," he said,gruffly.
"There seem to be a lot of rowdy parties along thisroad, and the man will be no use for an hour.
If you will tellus where you are going, we will see you safely there and say goodnight."
The young lady exhibited all the abrupt disturbance of a personwho is not commonly disturbed.
She said almost sharply and yetwith evident sincerity: "Of course I am awfully grateful to youfor all you've done--and there's plenty of room if you'll comein."
Turnbull, with the complete innocence of an absolutely soundmotive, immediately jumped into the car; but the girl cast an eyeat MacIan, who stood in the road for an instant as if rooted likea tree.
Then he also tumbled his long legs into the tonneau,having that sense of degradedly diving into heaven which so manyhave known in so many human houses when they consented to stop totea or were allowed to stop to supper.
The slowly revivingchauffeur was set in the back seat; Turnbull and MacIan hadfallen into the middle one; the lady with a steely coolness hadtaken the driver's seat and all the handles of that headlongmachine.
A moment afterwards the engine started, with a throb andleap unfamiliar to Turnbull, who had only once been in a motorduring a general election, and utterly unknown to MacIan, who inhis present mood thought it was the end of the world.
Almost atthe same instant that the car plucked itself out of the mud andwhipped away up the road, the man who had been flung into theditch rose waveringly to his feet.
When he saw the car escapinghe ran after it and shouted something which, owing to theincreasing distance, could not be heard.
It is awful to reflectthat, if his remark was valuable, it is quite lost to the world.
The car shot on up and down the shining moonlit lanes, and therewas no sound in it except the occasional click or catch of itsmachinery; for through some cause or other no soul inside itcould think of a word to say.
The lady symbolized her feelings,whatever they were, by urging the machine faster and faster untilscattered woodlands went by them in one black blotch and heavyhills and valleys seemed to ripple under the wheels like merewaves.
A little while afterwards this mood seemed to slacken andshe fell into a more ordinary pace; but still she did not speak.
Turnbull, who kept a more common and sensible view of the casethan anyone else, made some remark about the moonlight; butsomething indescribable made him also relapse into silence.
All this time MacIan had been in a sort of monstrous delirium,like some fabulous hero snatched up into the moon.
The differencebetween this experience and common experiences was analogous tothat between waking life and a dream.
Yet he did not feel in theleast as if he were dreaming; rather the other way; as waking wasmore actual than dreaming, so this seemed by another degree moreactual than waking itself.
But it was another life altogether,like a cosmos with a new dimension.
He felt he had been hurled into some new incarnation: into themidst of new relations, wrongs and rights, with toweringresponsibilities and almost tragic joys which he had as yet hadno time to examine.
Heaven had not merely sent him a message;Heaven itself had opened around him and given him an hour of itsown ancient and star-shattering energy.
He had never felt so muchalive before; and yet he was like a man in a trance.
And if youhad asked him on what his throbbing happiness hung, he could onlyhave told you that it hung on four or five visible facts, as acurtain hangs on four of five fixed nails.
The fact that the ladyhad a little fur at her throat; the fact that the curve of hercheek was a low and lean curve and that the moonlight caught theheight of her cheek-bone; the fact that her hands were small butheavily gloved as they gripped the steering-wheel; the fact thata white witch light was on the road; the fact that the briskbreeze of their passage stirred and fluttered a little not onlythe brown hair of her head but the black fur on her cap.
Allthese facts were to him certain and incredible, like sacraments.
When they had driven half a mile farther, a big shadow was flungacross the path, followed by its bulky owner, who eyed the carcritically but let it pass.
The silver moonlight picked out apiece or two of pewter ornament on his blue uniform; and as theywent by they knew it was a sergeant of police.
Three hundredyards farther on another policeman stepped out into the road asif to stop them, then seemed to doubt his own authority andstepped back again.
The girl was a daughter of the rich; and thispolice suspicion (under which all the poor live day and night)stung her for the first time into speech.
"What can they mean?"
she cried out in a kind of temper; "thiscar's going like a snail."
There was a short silence, and then Turnbull said: "It iscertainly very odd, you are driving quietly enough."
"You are driving nobly," said MacIan, and his words (which had nomeaning whatever) sounded hoarse and ungainly even in his ownears.
They passed the next mile and a half swiftly and smoothly; yetamong the many things which they passed in the course of it was aclump of eager policemen standing at a cross-road.
As theypassed, one of the policemen shouted something to the others; butnothing else happened.
Eight hundred yards farther on, Turnbullstood up suddenly in the swaying car.
"My God, MacIan!"
he called out, showing his first emotion ofthat night.
"I don't believe it's the pace; it couldn't be thepace.
I believe it's us."
MacIan sat motionless for a few moments and then turned up at hiscompanion a face that was as white as the moon above it.
"You may be right," he said at last; "if you are, I must tellher."
"I will tell the lady if you like," said Turnbull, with hisunconquered good temper.
"You!"
said MacIan, with a sort of sincere and instinctiveastonishment.
"Why should you--no, I must tell her, ofcourse----"And he leant forward and spoke to the lady in the fur cap.
"I am afraid, madam, that we may have got you into some trouble,"he said, and even as he said it it sounded wrong, like everythinghe said to this particular person in the long gloves.
"The factis," he resumed, desperately, "the fact is, we are being chasedby the police."
Then the last flattening hammer fell upon poorEvan's embarrassment; for the fluffy brown head with the furryblack cap did not turn by a section of the compass.
"We are chased by the police," repeated MacIan, vigorously; thenhe added, as if beginning an explanation, "You see, I am aCatholic."
The wind whipped back a curl of the brown hair so as tonecessitate a new theory of aesthetics touching the line of thecheek-bone; but the head did not turn.
"You see," began MacIan, again blunderingly, "this gentlemanwrote in his newspaper that Our Lady was a common woman, a badwoman, and so we agreed to fight; and we were fighting quite alittle time ago--but that was before we saw you."
The young lady driving her car had half turned her face tolisten; and it was not a reverent or a patient face that sheshowed him.
Her Norman nose was tilted a trifle too high uponthe slim stalk of her neck and body.
When MacIan saw that arrogant and uplifted profile pencilledplainly against the moonshine, he accepted an ultimate defeat.
He had expected the angels to despise him if he were wrong, butnot to despise him so much as this.
"You see," said the stumbling spokesman, "I was angry with himwhen he insulted the Mother of God, and I asked him to fight aduel with me; but the police are all trying to stop it."
Nothing seemed to waver or flicker in the fair young falconprofile; and it only opened its lips to say, after a silence: "Ithought people in our time were supposed to respect each other'sreligion."
Under the shadow of that arrogant face MacIan could only fallback on the obvious answer: "But what about a man's irreligion?"
The face only answered: "Well, you ought to be more broadminded."
If anyone else in the world had said the words, MacIan would havesnorted with his equine neigh of scorn.
But in this case heseemed knocked down by a superior simplicity, as if his eccentricattitude were rebuked by the innocence of a child.
He could notdissociate anything that this woman said or did or wore from anidea of spiritual rarity and virtue.
Like most others under thesame elemental passion, his soul was at present soaked in ethics.
He could have applied moral terms to the material objects of herenvironment.
If someone had spoken of "her generous ribbon" or"her chivalrous gloves" or "her merciful shoe-buckle," it wouldnot have seemed to him nonsense.
He was silent, and the girl went on in a lower key as if she weremomentarily softened and a little saddened also.
"It won't do,you know," she said; "you can't find out the truth in that way.
There are such heaps of churches and people thinking differentthings nowadays, and they all think they are right.
My uncle wasa Swedenborgian."
MacIan sat with bowed head, listening hungrily to her voice buthardly to her words, and seeing his great world drama growsmaller and smaller before his eyes till it was no bigger than achild's toy theatre.
"The time's gone by for all that," she went on; "you can't findout the real thing like that--if there is really anything tofind----" and she sighed rather drearily; for, like many of thewomen of our wealthy class, she was old and broken in thought,though young and clean enough in her emotions.
"Our object," said Turnbull, shortly, "is to make an effectivedemonstration"; and after that word, MacIan looked at his visionagain and found it smaller than ever.
"It would be in the newspapers, of course," said the girl.
"People read the newspapers, but they don't believe them, oranything else, I think."
And she sighed again.
She drove in silence a third of a mile before she added, as ifcompleting the sentence: "Anyhow, the whole thing's quiteabsurd."
"I don't think," began Turnbull, "that you quite realize----Hullo!
hullo--hullo--what's this?"
The amateur chauffeur had been forced to bring the car to astaggering stoppage, for a file of fat, blue policemen made awall across the way.
A sergeant came to the side and touched hispeaked cap to the lady.
"Beg your pardon, miss," he said with some embarrassment, for heknew her for a daughter of a dominant house, "but we have reasonto believe that the gentlemen in your car are----" and hehesitated for a polite phrase.
"I am Evan MacIan," said that gentleman, and stood up in a sortof gloomy pomp, not wholly without a touch of the sulks of aschoolboy.
"Yes, we will get out, sergeant," said Turnbull, more easily; "myname is James Turnbull.
We must not incommode the lady."
"What are you taking them up for?"
asked the young woman, lookingstraight in front of her along the road.
"It's under the new act," said the sergeant, almostapologetically.
"Incurable disturbers of the peace."
"What will happen to them?"
she asked, with the same frigidclearness.
"Westgate Adult Reformatory," he replied, briefly.
"Until when?"
"Until they are cured," said the official.
"Very well, sergeant," said the young lady, with a sort of tiredcommon sense.
"I am sure I don't want to protect criminals or goagainst the law; but I must tell you that these gentlemen havedone me a considerable service; you won't mind drawing your men alittle farther off while I say good night to them.
Men like thatalways misunderstand."
The sergeant was profoundly disquieted from the beginning at themere idea of arresting anyone in the company of a great lady; torefuse one of her minor requests was quite beyond his courage.
The police fell back to a few yards behind the car.
Turnbull tookup the two swords that were their only luggage; the swords that,after so many half duels, they were now to surrender at last.
MacIan, the blood thundering in his brain at the thought of thatinstant of farewell, bent over, fumbled at the handle and flungopen the door to get out.
But he did not get out.
He did not get out, because it isdangerous to jump out of a car when it is going at full speed.
And the car was going at full speed, because the young lady,without turning her head or so much as saying a syllable, haddriven down a handle that made the machine plunge forward like abuffalo and then fly over the landscape like a greyhound.
Thepolice made one rush to follow, and then dropped so grotesque andhopeless a chase.
Away in the vanishing distance they could seethe sergeant furiously making notes.
The open door, still left loose on its hinges, swung and bangedquite crazily as they went whizzing up one road and down another.
Nor did MacIan sit down; he stood up stunned and yet staring, ashe would have stood up at the trumpet of the Last Day.
A blackdot in the distance sprang up a tall black forest, swallowed themand spat them out again at the other end.
A railway bridge grewlarger and larger till it leapt upon their backs bellowing, andwas in its turn left behind.
Avenues of poplars on both sides ofthe road chased each other like the figures in a zoetrope.
Nowand then with a shock and rattle they went through sleepingmoonlit villages, which must have stirred an instant in theirsleep as at the passing of a fugitive earthquake.
Sometimes in anoutlying house a light in one erratic, unexpected window wouldgive them a nameless hint of the hundred human secrets which theyleft behind them with their dust.
Sometimes even a slouchingrustic would be afoot on the road and would look after them, asafter a flying phantom.
But still MacIan stood up staring atearth and heaven; and still the door he had flung open flappedloose like a flag.
Turnbull, after a few minutes of dumbamazement, had yielded to the healthiest element in his natureand gone off into uncontrollable fits of laughter.
The girl hadnot stirred an inch.
After another half mile that seemed a mere flash, Turnbull leantover and locked the door.
Evan staggered at last into his seatand hid his throbbing head in his hands; and still the car flewon and its driver sat inflexible and silent.
The moon had alreadygone down, and the whole darkness was faintly troubled withtwilight and the first movement of beasts and fowls.
It was thatmysterious moment when light is coming as if it were somethingunknown whose nature one could not guess--a mere alteration ineverything.
They looked at the sky and it seemed as dark as ever;then they saw the black shape of a tower or tree against it andknew that it was already grey.
Save that they were drivingsouthward and had certainly passed the longitude of London, theyknew nothing of their direction; but Turnbull, who had spent ayear on the Hampshire coast in his youth, began to recognize theunmistakable but quite indescribable villages of the Englishsouth.
Then a white witch fire began to burn between the blackstems of the fir-trees; and, like so many things in nature,though not in books on evolution, the daybreak, when it did come,came much quicker than one would think.
The gloomy heavens wereripped up and rolled away like a scroll, revealing splendours, asthe car went roaring up the curve of a great hill; and above themand black against the broadening light, there stood one of thosecrouching and fantastic trees that are first signals of the sea.
X.
THE SWORDS REJOINEDAs they came over the hill and down on the other side of it, itis not too much to say that the whole universe of God opened overthem and under them, like a thing unfolding to five times itssize.
Almost under their feet opened the enormous sea, at thebottom of a steep valley which fell down into a bay; and the seaunder their feet blazed at them almost as lustrous and almost asempty as the sky.
The sunrise opened above them like some cosmicexplosion, shining and shattering and yet silent; as if the worldwere blown to pieces without a sound.
Round the rays of thevictorious sun swept a sort of rainbow of confused and conqueredcolours--brown and blue and green and flaming rose-colour; asthough gold were driving before it all the colours of the world.
The lines of the landscape down which they sped, were the simple,strict, yet swerving, lines of a rushing river; so that it wasalmost as if they were being sucked down in a huge stillwhirlpool.
Turnbull had some such feeling, for he spoke for thefirst time for many hours.
"If we go down at this rate we shall be over the sea cliff," hesaid.
"How glorious!"
said MacIan.
When, however, they had come into the wide hollow at the bottomof that landslide, the car took a calm and graceful curve alongthe side of the sea, melted into the fringe of a few trees, andquietly, yet astonishingly, stopped.
A belated light was burningin the broad morning in the window of a sort of lodge- orgate-keepers' cottage; and the girl stood up in the car andturned her splendid face to the sun.
Evan seemed startled by the stillness, like one who had been bornamid sound and speed.
He wavered on his long legs as he stood up;he pulled himself together, and the only consequence was that hetrembled from head to foot.
Turnbull had already opened the dooron his side and jumped out.
The moment he had done so the strange young woman had one moremad movement, and deliberately drove the car a few yards farther.
Then she got out with an almost cruel coolness and began pullingoff her long gloves and almost whistling.
"You can leave me here," she said, quite casually, as if they hadmet five minutes before.
"That is the lodge of my father's place.
Please come in, if you like--but I understood that you had somebusiness."
Evan looked at that lifted face and found it merely lovely; hewas far too much of a fool to see that it was working with afinal fatigue and that its austerity was agony.
He was even foolenough to ask it a question.
"Why did you save us?"
he said,quite humbly.
The girl tore off one of her gloves, as if she were tearing offher hand.
"Oh, I don't know," she said, bitterly.
"Now I cometo think of it, I can't imagine."
Evan's thoughts, that had been piled up to the morning star,abruptly let him down with a crash into the very cellars of theemotional universe.
He remained in a stunned silence for a longtime; and that, if he had only known, was the wisest thing thathe could possibly do at the moment.
Indeed, the silence and the sunrise had their healing effect, forwhen the extraordinary lady spoke again, her tone was morefriendly and apologetic.
"I'm not really ungrateful," she said;"it was very good of you to save me from those men."
"But why?"
repeated the obstinate and dazed MacIan, "why did yousave us from the other men?
I mean the policemen?"
The girl's great brown eyes were lit up with a flash that was atonce final desperation and the loosening of some private andpassionate reserve.
"Oh, God knows!"
she cried.
"God knows that if there is a God Hehas turned His big back on everything.
God knows I have had nopleasure in my life, though I am pretty and young and father hasplenty of money.
And then people come and tell me that I ought todo things and I do them and it's all drivel.
They want you to dowork among the poor; which means reading Ruskin and feelingself-righteous in the best room in a poor tenement.
Or to helpsome cause or other, which always means bundling people out ofcrooked houses, in which they've always lived, into straighthouses, in which they often die.
And all the time you have insideonly the horrid irony of your own empty head and empty heart.
Iam to give to the unfortunate, when my whole misfortune is that Ihave nothing to give.
I am to teach, when I believe nothing atall that I was taught.
I am to save the children from death, andI am not even certain that I should not be better dead.
I supposeif I actually saw a child drowning I should save it.
But thatwould be from the same motive from which I have saved you, ordestroyed you, whichever it is that I have done."
"What was the motive?"
asked Evan, in a low voice.
"My motive is too big for my mind," answered the girl.
Then, after a pause, as she stared with a rising colour at theglittering sea, she said: "It can't be described, and yet I amtrying to describe it.
It seems to me not only that I am unhappy,but that there is no way of being happy.
Father is not happy,though he is a Member of Parliament----"  She paused a moment andadded with a ghost of a smile: "Nor Aunt Mabel, though a man fromIndia has told her the secret of all creeds.
But I may be wrong;there may be a way out.
And for one stark, insane second, I feltthat, after all, you had got the way out and that was why theworld hated you.
You see, if there were a way out, it would besure to be something that looked very queer."
Evan put his hand to his forehead and began stumblingly: "Yes, Isuppose we do seem----""Oh, yes, you look queer enough," she said, with ringingsincerity.
"You'll be all the better for a wash and brush up."
"You forget our business, madam," said Evan, in a shaking voice;"we have no concern but to kill each other."
"Well, I shouldn't be killed looking like that if I were you,"she replied, with inhuman honesty.
Evan stood and rolled his eyes in masculine bewilderment.
Thencame the final change in this Proteus, and she put out both herhands for an instant and said in a low tone on which he lived fordays and nights:"Don't you understand that I did not dare to stop you?
What youare doing is so mad that it may be quite true.
Somehow one cannever really manage to be an atheist."
Turnbull stood staring at the sea; but his shoulders showed thathe heard, and after one minute he turned his head.
But the girlhad only brushed Evan's hand with hers and had fled up the darkalley by the lodge gate.
Evan stood rooted upon the road, literally like some heavy statuehewn there in the age of the Druids.
It seemed impossible that heshould ever move.
Turnbull grew restless with this rigidity, andat last, after calling his companion twice or thrice, went up andclapped him impatiently on one of his big shoulders.
Evan wincedand leapt away from him with a repulsion which was not the hateof an unclean thing nor the dread of a dangerous one, but was aspasm of awe and separation from something from which he was nowsundered as by the sword of God.
He did not hate the atheist; itis possible that he loved him.
But Turnbull was now somethingmore dreadful than an enemy: he was a thing sealed and devoted--athing now hopelessly doomed to be either a corpse or anexecutioner.
"What is the matter with you?"
asked Turnbull, with his heartyhand still in the air; and yet he knew more about it than hisinnocent action would allow.
"James," said Evan, speaking like one under strong bodily pain,"I asked for God's answer and I have got it--got it in my vitals.
He knows how weak I am, and that I might forget the peril of thefaith, forget the face of Our Lady--yes, even with your blow uponher cheek.
But the honour of this earth has just this about it,that it can make a man's heart like iron.
I am from the Lords ofthe Isles and I dare not be a mere deserter.
Therefore, God hastied me by the chain of my worldly place and word, and there isnothing but fighting now."
"I think I understand you," said Turnbull, "but you sayeverything tail foremost."
"She wants us to do it," said Evan, in a voice crushed withpassion.
"She has hurt herself so that we might do it.
She hasleft her good name and her good sleep and all her habits anddignity flung away on the other side of England in the hope thatshe may hear of us and that we have broken some hole intoheaven."
"I thought I knew what you mean," said Turnbull, biting hisbeard; "it does seem as if we ought to do something after all shehas done this night."
"I never liked you so much before," said MacIan, in bittersorrow.
As he spoke, three solemn footmen came out of the lodge gate andassembled to assist the chauffeur to his room.
The mere sight ofthem made the two wanderers flee as from a too frightfulincongruity, and before they knew where they were, they were wellupon the grassy ledge of England that overlooks the Channel.
Evansaid suddenly: "Will they let me see her in heaven once in athousand ages?"
and addressed the remark to the editor of _TheAtheist_, as on which he would be likely or qualified to answer.
But no answer came; a silence sank between the two.
Turnbull strode sturdily to the edge of the cliff and looked out,his companion following, somewhat more shaken by his recentagitation.
"If that's the view you take," said Turnbull, "and I don't sayyou are wrong, I think I know where we shall be best off for thebusiness.
As it happens, I know this part of the south coastpretty well.
And unless I am mistaken there's a way down thecliff just here which will land us on a stretch of firm sandwhere no one is likely to follow us."
The Highlander made a gesture of assent and came also almost tothe edge of the precipice.
The sunrise, which was broadening oversea and shore, was one of those rare and splendid ones in whichthere seems to be no mist or doubt, and nothing but a universalclarification more and more complete.
All the colours weretransparent.
It seemed like a triumphant prophecy of some perfectworld where everything being innocent will be intelligible; aworld where even our bodies, so to speak, may be as of burningglass.
Such a world is faintly though fiercely figured in thecoloured windows of Christian architecture.
The sea that laybefore them was like a pavement of emerald, bright and almostbrittle; the sky against which its strict horizon hung was almostabsolutely white, except that close to the sky line, like scarletbraids on the hem of a garment, lay strings of flaky cloud of sogleaming and gorgeous a red that they seemed cut out of somestrange blood-red celestial metal, of which the mere gold of thisearth is but a drab yellow imitation.
"The hand of Heaven is still pointing," muttered the man ofsuperstition to himself.
"And now it is a blood-red hand."
The cool voice of his companion cut in upon his monologue,calling to him from a little farther along the cliff, to tell himthat he had found the ladder of descent.
It began as a steep andsomewhat greasy path, which then tumbled down twenty or thirtyfeet in the form of a fall of rough stone steps.
After that,there was a rather awkward drop on to a ledge of stone and thenthe journey was undertaken easily and even elegantly by theremains of an ornamental staircase, such as might have belongedto some long-disused watering-place.
All the time that the twotravellers sank from stage to stage of this downward journey,there closed over their heads living bridges and caverns of themost varied foliage, all of which grew greener, redder, or moregolden, in the growing sunlight of the morning.
Life, too, of themore moving sort rose at the sun on every side of them.
Birdswhirred and fluttered in the undergrowth, as if imprisoned ingreen cages.
Other birds were shaken up in great clouds from thetree-tops, as if they were blossoms detached and scattered up toheaven.
Animals which Turnbull was too much of a Londoner andMacIan too much of a Northerner to know, slipped by among thetangle or ran pattering up the tree-trunks.
Both the men,according to their several creeds, felt the full thunder of thepsalm of life as they had never heard it before; MacIan felt Godthe Father, benignant in all His energies, and Turnbull thatultimate anonymous energy, that _Natura Naturans_, which is thewhole theme of Lucretius.
It was down this clamorous ladder oflife that they went down to die.
They broke out upon a brown semicircle of sand, so free fromhuman imprint as to justify Turnbull's profession.
They strodeout upon it, stuck their swords in the sand, and had a pause tooimportant for speech.
Turnbull eyed the coast curiously for amoment, like one awakening memories of childhood; then he saidabruptly, like a man remembering somebody's name: "But, ofcourse, we shall be better off still round the corner of CragnessPoint; nobody ever comes there at all."
And picking up his swordagain, he began striding towards a big bluff of the rocks whichstood out upon their left.
MacIan followed him round the cornerand found himself in what was certainly an even finer fencingcourt, of flat, firm sand, enclosed on three sides by white wallsof rock, and on the fourth by the green wall of the advancingsea.
"We are quite safe here," said Turnbull, and, to the other'ssurprise, flung himself down, sitting on the brown beach.
"You see, I was brought up near here," he explained.
"I was sentfrom Scotland to stop with my aunt.
It is highly probable that Imay die here.
Do you mind if I light a pipe?"
"Of course, do whatever you like," said MacIan, with a chokingvoice, and he went and walked alone by himself along the wet,glistening sands.
Ten minutes afterwards he came back again, white with his ownwhirlwind of emotions; Turnbull was quite cheerful and wasknocking out the end of his pipe.
"You see, we have to do it," said MacIan.
"She tied us to it."
"Of course, my dear fellow," said the other, and leapt up aslightly as a monkey.
They took their places gravely in the very centre of the greatsquare of sand, as if they had thousands of spectators.
Beforesaluting, MacIan, who, being a mystic, was one inch nearer toNature, cast his eye round the huge framework of their heroicfolly.
The three walls of rock all leant a little outward, thoughat various angles; but this impression was exaggerated in thedirection of the incredible by the heavy load of living trees andthickets which each wall wore on its top like a huge shock ofhair.
On all that luxurious crest of life the risen andvictorious sun was beating, burnishing it all like gold, andevery bird that rose with that sunrise caught a light like a starupon it like the dove of the Holy Spirit.
Imaginative life hadnever so much crowded upon MacIan.
He felt that he could writewhole books about the feelings of a single bird.
He felt that fortwo centuries he would not tire of being a rabbit.
He was in thePalace of Life, of which the very tapestries and curtains werealive.
Then he recovered himself, and remembered his affairs.
Both men saluted, and iron rang upon iron.
It was exactly at thesame moment that he realized that his enemy's left ankle wasencircled with a ring of salt water that had crept up to hisfeet.
"What is the matter?"
said Turnbull, stopping an instant, for hehad grown used to every movement of his extraordinaryfellow-traveller's face.
MacIan glanced again at that silver anklet of sea-water and thenlooked beyond at the next promontory round which a deep sea wasboiling and leaping.
Then he turned and looked back and saw heavyfoam being shaken up to heaven about the base of Cragness Point.
"The sea has cut us off," he said, curtly.
"I have noticed it," said Turnbull with equal sobriety.
"Whatview do you take of the development?"
Evan threw away his weapon, and, as his custom was, imprisonedhis big head in his hands.
Then he let them fall and said: "Yes,I know what it means; and I think it is the fairest thing.
It isthe finger of God--red as blood--still pointing.
But now itpoints to two graves."
There was a space filled with the sound of the sea, and thenMacIan spoke again in a voice pathetically reasonable: "You see,we both saved her--and she told us both to fight--and it wouldnot be just that either should fail and fall alone, while theother----""You mean," said Turnbull, in a voice surprisingly soft andgentle, "that there is something fine about fighting in a placewhere even the conqueror must die?"
"Oh, you have got it right, you have got it right!"
cried outEvan, in an extraordinary childish ecstasy.
"Oh, I'm sure thatyou really believe in God!"
Turnbull answered not a word, but only took up his fallen sword.
For the third time Evan MacIan looked at those three sides ofEnglish cliff hung with their noisy load of life.
He had beenat a loss to understand the almost ironical magnificence of allthose teeming creatures and tropical colours and smells thatsmoked happily to heaven.
But now he knew that he was in theclosed court of death and that all the gates were sealed.
He drank in the last green and the last red and the last gold,those unique and indescribable things of God, as a man drainsgood wine at the bottom of his glass.
Then he turned and salutedhis enemy once more, and the two stood up and fought till thefoam flowed over their knees.
Then MacIan stepped backward suddenly with a splash and held uphis hand.
"Turnbull!"
he cried; "I can't help it--fair fightingis more even than promises.
And this is not fair fighting."
"What the deuce do you mean?"
asked the other, staring.
"I've only just thought of it," cried Evan, brokenly.
"We're verywell matched--it may go on a good time--the tide is coming upfast--and I'm a foot and a half taller.
You'll be washed awaylike seaweed before it's above my breeches.
I'll not fight foulfor all the girls and angels in the universe."
"Will you oblige me," said Turnbull, with staring grey eyes and avoice of distinct and violent politeness; "will you oblige me byjolly well minding your own business?
Just you stand up andfight, and we'll see who will be washed away like seaweed.
Youwanted to finish this fight and you shall finish it, or I'lldenounce you as a coward to the whole of that assembled company."
Evan looked very doubtful and offered a somewhat wavering weapon;but he was quickly brought back to his senses by his opponent'ssword-point, which shot past him, shaving his shoulder by a hair.
By this time the waves were well up Turnbull's thigh, and whatwas worse, they were beginning to roll and break heavily aroundthem.
MacIan parried this first lunge perfectly, the next lessperfectly; the third in all human probability he would not haveparried at all; the Christian champion would have been pinnedlike a butterfly, and the atheistic champion left to drown like arat, with such consolation as his view of the cosmos affordedhim.
But just as Turnbull launched his heaviest stroke, the sea,in which he stood up to his hips, launched a yet heavier one.
Awave breaking beyond the others smote him heavily like a hammerof water.
One leg gave way, he was swung round and sucked intothe retreating sea, still gripping his sword.
MacIan put his sword between his teeth and plunged after hisdisappearing enemy.
He had the sense of having the whole universeon top of him as crest after crest struck him down.
It seemed tohim quite a cosmic collapse, as if all the seven heavens werefalling on him one after the other.
But he got hold of theatheist's left leg and he did not let it go.
After some ten minutes of foam and frenzy, in which all thesenses at once seemed blasted by the sea, Evan found himselflaboriously swimming on a low, green swell, with the sword stillin his teeth and the editor of _The Atheist_ still under his arm.
What he was going to do he had not even the most glimmering idea;so he merely kept his grip and swam somehow with one hand.
He ducked instinctively as there bulked above him a big, blackwave, much higher than any that he had seen.
Then he saw that itwas hardly the shape of any possible wave.
Then he saw that itwas a fisherman's boat, and, leaping upward, caught hold of thebow.
The boat pitched forward with its stern in the air for justas much time as was needed to see that there was nobody in it.
After a moment or two of desperate clambering, however, therewere two people in it, Mr. Evan MacIan, panting and sweating, andMr. James Turnbull, uncommonly close to being drowned.
After tenminutes' aimless tossing in the empty fishing-boat he recovered,however, stirred, stretched himself, and looked round on therolling waters.
Then, while taking no notice of the streams ofsalt water that were pouring from his hair, beard, coat, boots,and trousers, he carefully wiped the wet off his sword-blade topreserve it from the possibilities of rust.
MacIan found two oars in the bottom of the deserted boat andbegan somewhat drearily to row.
*                    *                   *A rainy twilight was clearing to cold silver over the moaningsea, when the battered boat that had rolled and drifted almostaimlessly all night, came within sight of land, though of landwhich looked almost as lost and savage as the waves.
All nightthere had been but little lifting in the leaden sea, only now andthen the boat had been heaved up, as on a huge shoulder whichslipped from under it; such occasional sea-quakes came probablyfrom the swell of some steamer that had passed it in the dark;otherwise the waves were harmless though restless.
But it waspiercingly cold, and there was, from time to time, a splutter ofrain like the splutter of the spray, which seemed almost tofreeze as it fell.
MacIan, more at home than his companion inthis quite barbarous and elemental sort of adventure, had rowedtoilsomely with the heavy oars whenever he saw anything thatlooked like land; but for the most part had trusted with grimtranscendentalism to wind and tide.
Among the implements of theirfirst outfit the brandy alone had remained to him, and he gave itto his freezing companion in quantities which greatly alarmedthat temperate Londoner; but MacIan came from the cold seas andmists where a man can drink a tumbler of raw whisky in a boatwithout it making him wink.
When the Highlander began to pull really hard upon the oars,Turnbull craned his dripping red head out of the boat to see thegoal of his exertions.
It was a sufficiently uninviting one;nothing so far as could be seen but a steep and shelving bank ofshingle, made of loose little pebbles such as children like, butslanting up higher than a house.
On the top of the mound, againstthe sky line, stood up the brown skeleton of some broken fence orbreakwater.
With the grey and watery dawn crawling up behind it,the fence really seemed to say to our philosophic adventurersthat they had come at last to the other end of nowhere.
Bent by necessity to his labour, MacIan managed the heavy boatwith real power and skill, and when at length he ran it up on asmoother part of the slope it caught and held so that they couldclamber out, not sinking farther than their knees into the waterand the shingle.
A foot or two farther up their feet found thebeach firmer, and a few moments afterwards they were leaning onthe ragged breakwater and looking back at the sea they hadescaped.
They had a dreary walk across wastes of grey shingle in the greydawn before they began to come within hail of human fields orroads; nor had they any notion of what fields or roads they wouldbe.
Their boots were beginning to break up and the confusion ofstones tried them severely, so that they were glad to lean ontheir swords, as if they were the staves of pilgrims.
MacIanthought vaguely of a weird ballad of his own country whichdescribes the soul in Purgatory as walking on a plain full ofsharp stones, and only saved by its own charities upon earth.
If ever thou gavest hosen and shoon            Every night and all,        Sit thee down and put them on,            And Christ receive thy soul.
Turnbull had no such lyrical meditations, but he was in an evenworse temper.
At length they came to a pale ribbon of road, edged by a shelf ofrough and almost colourless turf; and a few feet up the slopethere stood grey and weather-stained, one of those big waysidecrucifixes which are seldom seen except in Catholic countries.
MacIan put his hand to his head and found that his bonnet was notthere.
Turnbull gave one glance at the crucifix--a glance at oncesympathetic and bitter, in which was concentrated the whole ofSwinburne's poem on the same occasion.
O hidden face of man, whereover            The years have woven a viewless veil,        If thou wert verily man's lover            What did thy love or blood avail?
Thy blood the priests mix poison of,        And in gold shekels coin thy love.
Then, leaving MacIan in his attitude of prayer, Turnbull began tolook right and left very sharply, like one looking for something.
Suddenly, with a little cry, he saw it and ran forward.
A fewyards from them along the road a lean and starved sort of hedgecame pitifully to an end.
Caught upon its prickly angle, however,there was a very small and very dirty scrap of paper that mighthave hung there for months, since it escaped from someone tearingup a letter or making a spill out of a newspaper.
Turnbullsnatched at it and found it was the corner of a printed page,very coarsely printed, like a cheap novelette, and just largeenough to contain the words: "_et c'est elle qui_----""Hurrah!"
cried Turnbull, waving his fragment; "we are safe atlast.
We are free at last.
We are somewhere better than Englandor Eden or Paradise.
MacIan, we are in the Land of the Duel!"
"Where do you say?"
said the other, looking at him heavily andwith knitted brows, like one almost dazed with the grey doubts ofdesolate twilight and drifting sea.
"We are in France!"
cried Turnbull, with a voice like a trumpet,"in the land where things really happen--_Tout arrive en France_.
We arrive in France.
Look at this little message," and he heldout the scrap of paper.
"There's an omen for you superstitioushill folk.
_C'est elle qui--Mais oui, mais oui, c'est elle quisauvera encore le monde_."
"France!"
repeated MacIan, and his eyes awoke again in his headlike large lamps lighted.
"Yes, France!"
said Turnbull, and all the rhetorical part of himcame to the top, his face growing as red as his hair.
"France,that has always been in rebellion for liberty and reason.
France,that has always assailed superstition with the club of Rabelaisor the rapier of Voltaire.
France, at whose first council tablesits the sublime figure of Julian the Apostate.
France, where aman said only the other day those splendid unanswerablewords"--with a superb gesture--"'we have extinguished in heaventhose lights that men shall never light again.'"
"No," said MacIan, in a voice that shook with a controlledpassion.
"But France, which was taught by St. Bernard and led towar by Joan of Arc.
France that made the crusades.
France thatsaved the Church and scattered the heresies by the mouths ofBossuet and Massillon.
France, which shows today the conqueringmarch of Catholicism, as brain after brain surrenders to it,Brunetire, Coppe, Hauptmann, Barrs, Bourget, Lematre."
"France!"
asserted Turnbull with a sort of rollickingself-exaggeration, very unusual with him, "France, which is onetorrent of splendid scepticism from Abelard to Anatole France."
"France," said MacIan, "which is one cataract of clear faith fromSt. Louis to Our Lady of Lourdes."
"France at least," cried Turnbull, throwing up his sword inschoolboy triumph, "in which these things are thought about andfought about.
France, where reason and religion clash in onecontinual tournament.
France, above all, where men understand thepride and passion which have plucked our blades from theirscabbards.
Here, at least, we shall not be chased and spied on bysickly parsons and greasy policemen, because we wish to put ourlives on the game.
Courage, my friend, we have come to thecountry of honour."
MacIan did not even notice the incongruous phrase "my friend",but nodding again and again, drew his sword and flung thescabbard far behind him in the road.
"Yes," he cried, in a voice of thunder, "we will fight here and_He_ shall look on at it."
Turnbull glanced at the crucifix with a sort of scowlinggood-humour and then said: "He may look and see His crossdefeated."
"The cross cannot be defeated," said MacIan, "for it is Defeat."
A second afterwards the two bright, blood-thirsty weapons madethe sign of the cross in horrible parody upon each other.
They had not touched each other twice, however, when upon thehill, above the crucifix, there appeared another horrible parodyof its shape; the figure of a man who appeared for an instantwaving his outspread arms.
He had vanished in an instant; butMacIan, whose fighting face was set that way, had seen the shapemomentarily but quite photographically.
And while it was like acomic repetition of the cross, it was also, in that place andhour, something more incredible.
It had been only instantaneouslyon the retina of his eye; but unless his eye and mind were goingmad together, the figure was that of an ordinary Londonpoliceman.
He tried to concentrate his senses on the sword-play; but onehalf of his brain was wrestling with the puzzle; the apocalypticand almost seraphic apparition of a stout constable out ofClapham on top of a dreary and deserted hill in France.
He didnot, however, have to puzzle long.
Before the duellists hadexchanged half a dozen passes, the big, blue policeman appearedonce more on the top of the hill, a palpable monstrosity in theeye of heaven.
He was waving only one arm now and seemed to beshouting directions.
At the same moment a mass of blue blockedthe corner of the road behind the small, smart figure ofTurnbull, and a small company of policemen in the English uniformcame up at a kind of half-military double.
Turnbull saw the stare of consternation in his enemy's face andswung round to share its cause.
When he saw it, cool as he was,he staggered back.
"What the devil are you doing here?"
he called out in a high,shrill voice of authority, like one who finds a tramp in his ownlarder.
"Well, sir," said the sergeant in command, with that sort ofheavy civility shown only to the evidently guilty, "seems to mewe might ask what are you doing here?"
"We are having an affair of honour," said Turnbull, as if it werethe most rational thing in the world.
"If the French police liketo interfere, let them interfere.
But why the blue blazes shouldyou interfere, you great blue blundering sausages?"
"I'm afraid, sir," said the sergeant with restraint, "I'm afraidI don't quite follow you."
"I mean, why don't the French police take this up if it's got tobe taken up?
I always heard that they were spry enough in theirown way."
"Well, sir," said the sergeant reflectively, "you see, sir, theFrench police don't take this up--well, because you see, sir,this ain't France.
This is His Majesty's dominions, same as'Ampstead 'eath."
"Not France?"
repeated Turnbull, with a sort of dull incredulity.
"No, sir," said the sergeant; "though most of the people talkFrench.
This is the island called St. Loup, sir, an island in theChannel.
We've been sent down specially from London, as you weresuch specially distinguished criminals, if you'll allow me to sayso.
Which reminds me to warn you that anything you say may beused against you at your trial."
"Quite so," said Turnbull, and lurched suddenly against thesergeant, so as to tip him over the edge of the road with a crashinto the shingle below.
Then leaving MacIan and the policemenequally and instantaneously nailed to the road, he ran a littleway along it, leapt off on to a part of the beach, which he hadfound in his journey to be firmer, and went across it with aclatter of pebbles.
His sudden calculation was successful; thepolice, unacquainted with the various levels of the loose beach,tried to overtake him by the shorter cut and found themselves,being heavy men, almost up to their knees in shoals of slipperyshingle.
Two who had been slower with their bodies were quickerwith their minds, and seeing Turnbull's trick, ran along the edgeof the road after him.
Then MacIan finally awoke, and leavinghalf his sleeve in the grip of the only man who tried to holdhim, took the two policemen in the small of their backs with theimpetus of a cannon-ball and, sending them also flat among thestones, went tearing after his twin defier of the law.
As they were both good runners, the start they had gained wasdecisive.
They dropped over a high breakwater farther on upon thebeach, turned sharply, and scrambled up a line of ribbed rocks,crowned with a thicket, crawled through it, scratching theirhands and faces, and dropped into another road; and there foundthat they could slacken their speed into a steady trot.
In allthis desperate dart and scramble, they still kept hold of theirdrawn swords, which now, indeed, in the vigorous phrase ofBunyan, seemed almost to grow out of their hands.
They had run another half mile or so when it became apparent thatthey were entering a sort of scattered village.
One or twowhitewashed cottages and even a shop had appeared along the sideof the road.
Then, for the first time, Turnbull twisted round hisred bear to get a glimpse of his companion, who was a foot or twobehind, and remarked abruptly: "Mr. MacIan, we've been going thewrong way to work all along.
We're traced everywhere, becauseeverybody knows about us.
It's as if one went about with Kruger'sbeard on Mafeking Night."
"What do you mean?"
said MacIan, innocently.
"I mean," said Turnbull, with steady conviction, "that what wewant is a little diplomacy, and I am going to buy some in ashop."
XI.
A SCANDAL IN THE VILLAGEIn the little hamlet of Haroc, in the Isle of St. Loup, therelived a man who--though living under the English flag--wasabsolutely untypical of the French tradition.
He was quiteunnoticeable, but that was exactly where he was quite himself.
Hewas not even extraordinarily French; but then it is against theFrench tradition to be extraordinarily French.
OrdinaryEnglishmen would only have thought him a little old-fashioned;imperialistic Englishmen would really have mistaken him for theold John Bull of the caricatures.
He was stout; he was quiteundistinguished; and he had side-whiskers, worn just a littlelonger than John Bull's.
He was by name Pierre Durand; he was bytrade a wine merchant; he was by politics a conservativerepublican; he had been brought up a Catholic, had always thoughtand acted as an agnostic, and was very mildly returning to theChurch in his later years.
He had a genius (if one can even useso wild a word in connexion with so tame a person) a genius forsaying the conventional thing on every conceivable subject; orrather what we in England would call the conventional thing.
Forit was not convention with him, but solid and manly conviction.
Convention implies cant or affectation, and he had not thefaintest smell of either.
He was simply an ordinary citizen withordinary views; and if you had told him so he would have taken itas an ordinary compliment.
If you had asked him about women, hewould have said that one must preserve their domesticity anddecorum; he would have used the stalest words, but he would havein reserve the strongest arguments.
If you had asked him aboutgovernment, he would have said that all citizens were free andequal, but he would have meant what he said.
If you had asked himabout education, he would have said that the young must betrained up in habits of industry and of respect for theirparents.
Still he would have set them the example of industry,and he would have been one of the parents whom they couldrespect.
A state of mind so hopelessly central is depressing tothe English instinct.
But then in England a man announcing theseplatitudes is generally a fool and a frightened fool, announcingthem out of mere social servility.
But Durand was anything but afool; he had read all the eighteenth century, and could havedefended his platitudes round every angle of eighteenth-centuryargument.
And certainly he was anything but a coward: swollen andsedentary as he was, he could have hit any man back who touchedhim with the instant violence of an automatic machine; and dyingin a uniform would have seemed to him only the sort of thing thatsometimes happens.
I am afraid it is impossible to explain thismonster amid the exaggerative sects and the eccentric clubs of mycountry.
He was merely a man.
He lived in a little villa which was furnished well withcomfortable chairs and tables and highly uncomfortable classicalpictures and medallions.
The art in his home contained nothingbetween the two extremes of hard, meagre designs of Greek headsand Roman togas, and on the other side a few very vulgar Catholicimages in the crudest colours; these were mostly in hisdaughter's room.
He had recently lost his wife, whom he had lovedheartily and rather heavily in complete silence, and upon whosegrave he was constantly in the habit of placing hideous littlewreaths, made out of a sort of black-and-white beads.
To his onlydaughter he was equally devoted, though he restricted her a gooddeal under a sort of theoretic alarm about her innocence; analarm which was peculiarly unnecessary, first, because she was anexceptionally reticent and religious girl, and secondly, becausethere was hardly anybody else in the place.
Madeleine Durand was physically a sleepy young woman, and mighteasily have been supposed to be morally a lazy one.
It is,however, certain that the work of her house was done somehow, andit is even more rapidly ascertainable that nobody else did it.
The logician is, therefore, driven back upon the assumption thatshe did it; and that lends a sort of mysterious interest to herpersonality at the beginning.
She had very broad, low, and levelbrows, which seemed even lower because her warm yellow hairclustered down to her eyebrows; and she had a face just plumpenough not to look as powerful as it was.
Anything that was heavyin all this was abruptly lightened by two large, light china-blueeyes, lightened all of a sudden as if it had been lifted into theair by two big blue butterflies.
The rest of her was less thanmiddle-sized, and was of a casual and comfortable sort; and shehad this difference from such girls as the girl in the motor-car,that one did not incline to take in her figure at all, but onlyher broad and leonine and innocent head.
Both the father and the daughter were of the sort that wouldnormally have avoided all observation; that is, all observationin that extraordinary modern world which calls out everythingexcept strength.
Both of them had strength below the surface;they were like quiet peasants owning enormous and unquarriedmines.
The father with his square face and grey side whiskers,the daughter with her square face and golden fringe of hair, wereboth stronger than they know; stronger than anyone knew.
Thefather believed in civilization, in the storied tower we haveerected to affront nature; that is, the father believed in Man.
The daughter believed in God; and was even stronger.
They neitherof them believed in themselves; for that is a decadent weakness.
The daughter was called a devotee.
She left upon ordinary peoplethe impression--the somewhat irritating impression--produced bysuch a person; it can only be described as the sense of strongwater being perpetually poured into some abyss.
She did herhousework easily; she achieved her social relations sweetly; shewas never neglectful and never unkind.
This accounted for allthat was soft in her, but not for all that was hard.
She trodfirmly as if going somewhere; she flung her face back as ifdefying something; she hardly spoke a cross word, yet there wasoften battle in her eyes.
The modern man asked doubtfully whereall this silent energy went to.
He would have stared still moredoubtfully if he had been told that it all went into her prayers.
The conventions of the Isle of St. Loup were necessarily acompromise or confusion between those of France and England; andit was vaguely possible for a respectable young lady to havehalf-attached lovers, in a way that would be impossible to the_bourgeoisie_ of France.
One man in particular had made himselfan unmistakable figure in the track of this girl as she went tochurch.
He was a short, prosperous-looking man, whose long, bushyblack beard and clumsy black umbrella made him seem both shorterand older than he really was; but whose big, bold eyes, and stepthat spurned the ground, gave him an instant character of youth.
His name was Camille Bert, and he was a commercial traveller whohad only been in the island an idle week before he began tohover in the tracks of Madeleine Durand.
Since everyone knowseveryone in so small a place, Madeleine certainly knew him tospeak to; but it is not very evident that she ever spoke.
Hehaunted her, however; especially at church, which was, indeed,one of the few certain places for finding her.
In her home shehad a habit of being invisible, sometimes through insatiabledomesticity, sometimes through an equally insatiable solitude.
M.Bert did not give the impression of a pious man, though he didgive, especially with his eyes, the impression of an honest one.
But he went to Mass with a simple exactitude that could not bemistaken for a pose, or even for a vulgar fascination.
It wasperhaps this religious regularity which eventually drew Madeleineinto recognition of him.
At least it is certain that she twicespoke to him with her square and open smile in the porch of thechurch; and there was human nature enough in the hamlet to turneven that into gossip.
But the real interest arose suddenly as a squall arises with theextraordinary affair that occurred about five days after.
Therewas about a third of a mile beyond the village of Haroc a largebut lonely hotel upon the London or Paris model, but commonlyalmost entirely empty.
Among the accidental group of guests whohad come to it at this season was a man whose nationality no onecould fix and who bore the non-committal name of Count Gregory.
He treated everybody with complete civility and almost incomplete silence.
On the few occasions when he spoke, he spokeeither French, English, or once (to the priest) Latin; and thegeneral opinion was that he spoke them all wrong.
He was a large,lean man, with the stoop of an aged eagle, and even the eagle'snose to complete it; he had old-fashioned military whiskers andmoustache dyed with a garish and highly incredible yellow.
He hadthe dress of a showy gentleman and the manners of a decayedgentleman; he seemed (as with a sort of simplicity) to be tryingto be a dandy when he was too old even to know that he was old.
Ye he was decidedly a handsome figure with his curled yellow hairand lean fastidious face; and he wore a peculiar frock-coat ofbright turquoise blue, with an unknown order pinned to it, and hecarried a huge and heavy cane.
Despite his silence and hisdandified dress and whiskers, the island might never have heardof him but for the extraordinary event of which I have spoken,which fell about in the following way:In such casual atmospheres only the enthusiastic go toBenediction; and as the warm blue twilight closed over the littlecandle-lit church and village, the line of worshippers who wenthome from the former to the latter thinned out until it broke.
Onone such evening at least no one was in church except the quiet,unconquerable Madeleine, four old women, one fisherman, and, ofcourse, the irrepressible M. Camille Bert.
The others seemed tomelt away afterwards into the peacock colours of the dim greengrass and the dark blue sky.
Even Durand was invisible instead ofbeing merely reverentially remote; and Madeleine set forththrough the patch of black forest alone.
She was not in the leastafraid of loneliness, because she was not afraid of devils.
Ithink they were afraid of her.
In a clearing of the wood, however, which was lit up with a lastpatch of the perishing sunlight, there advanced upon her suddenlyone who was more startling than a devil.
The incomprehensibleCount Gregory, with his yellow hair like flame and his face likethe white ashes of the flame, was advancing bareheaded towardsher, flinging out his arms and his long fingers with a franticgesture.
"We are alone here," he cried, "and you would be at my mercy,only that I am at yours."
Then his frantic hands fell by his sides and he looked up underhis brows with an expression that went well with his hardbreathing.
Madeleine Durand had come to a halt at first inchildish wonder, and now, with more than masculine self-control,"I fancy I know your face, sir," she said, as if to gain time.
"I know I shall not forget yours," said the other, and extendedonce more his ungainly arms in an unnatural gesture.
Then of asudden there came out of him a spout of wild and yet pompousphrases.
"It is as well that you should know the worst and thebest.
I am a man who knows no limit; I am the most callous ofcriminals, the most unrepentant of sinners.
There is no man in mydominions so vile as I.
But my dominions stretch from the olivesof Italy to the fir-woods of Denmark, and there is no nook of allof them in which I have not done a sin.
But when I bear you awayI shall be doing my first sacrilege, and also my first act ofvirtue."
He seized her suddenly by the elbow; and she did notscream but only pulled and tugged.
Yet though she had notscreamed, someone astray in the woods seemed to have heard thestruggle.
A short but nimble figure came along the woodland pathlike a humming bullet and had caught Count Gregory a crack acrossthe face before his own could be recognized.
When it wasrecognized it was that of Camille, with the black elderly beardand the young ardent eyes.
Up to the moment when Camille had hit the Count, Madeleine hadentertained no doubt that the Count was merely a madman.
Now shewas startled with a new sanity; for the tall man in the yellowwhiskers and yellow moustache first returned the blow of Bert, asif it were a sort of duty, and then stepped back with a slightbow and an easy smile.
"This need go no further here, M. Bert," he said.
"I need notremind you how far it should go elsewhere."
"Certainly, you need remind me of nothing," answered Camille,stolidly.
"I am glad that you are just not too much of ascoundrel for a gentleman to fight."
"We are detaining the lady," said Count Gregory, with politeness;and, making a gesture suggesting that he would have taken off hishat if he had had one, he strode away up the avenue of trees andeventually disappeared.
He was so complete an aristocrat that hecould offer his back to them all the way up that avenue; and hisback never once looked uncomfortable.
"You must allow me to see you home," said Bert to the girl, in agruff and almost stifled voice; "I think we have only a littleway to go."
"Only a little way," she said, and smiled once more that night,in spite of fatigue and fear and the world and the flesh and thedevil.
The glowing and transparent blue of twilight had long beencovered by the opaque and slatelike blue of night, when hehanded her into the lamp-lit interior of her home.
He went outhimself into the darkness, walking sturdily, but tearing at hisblack beard.
All the French or semi-French gentry of the district consideredthis a case in which a duel was natural and inevitable, andneither party had any difficulty in finding seconds, strangers asthey were in the place.
Two small landowners, who were careful,practising Catholics, willingly undertook to represent thatstrict church-goer Camille Burt; while the profligate butapparently powerful Count Gregory found friends in an energeticlocal doctor who was ready for social promotion and an accidentalCalifornian tourist who was ready for anything.
As no particularpurpose could be served by delay, it was arranged that the affairshould fall out three days afterwards.
And when this was settledthe whole community, as it were, turned over again in bed andthought no more about the matter.
At least there was only onemember of it who seemed to be restless, and that was she who wascommonly most restful.
On the next night Madeleine Durand went tochurch as usual; and as usual the stricken Camille was therealso.
What was not so usual was that when they were a bow-shotfrom the church Madeleine turned round and walked back to him.
"Sir," she began, "it is not wrong of me to speak to you," andthe very words gave him a jar of unexpected truth; for in all thenovels he had ever read she would have begun: "It is wrong of meto speak to you."
She went on with wide and serious eyes like ananimal's: "It is not wrong of me to speak to you, because yoursoul, or anybody's soul, matters so much more than what the worldsays about anybody.
I want to talk to you about what you aregoing to do."
Bert saw in front of him the inevitable heroine of the novelstrying to prevent bloodshed; and his pale firm face becameimplacable.
"I would do anything but that for you," he said; "but no man canbe called less than a man."
She looked at him for a moment with a face openly puzzled, andthen broke into an odd and beautiful half-smile.
"Oh, I don't mean that," she said; "I don't talk about what Idon't understand.
No one has ever hit me; and if they had Ishould not feel as a man may.
I am sure it is not the best thingto fight.
It would be better to forgive--if one could reallyforgive.
But when people dine with my father and say thatfighting a duel is mere murder--of course I can see that is notjust.
It's all so different--having a reason--and letting theother man know--and using the same guns and things--and doing itin front of your friends.
I'm awfully stupid, but I know that menlike you aren't murderers.
But it wasn't that that I meant."
"What did you mean?"
asked the other, looking broodingly at theearth.
"Don't you know," she said, "there is only one more celebration?
I thought that as you always go to church--I thought you wouldcommunicate this morning."
Bert stepped backward with a sort of action she had never seen inhim before.
It seemed to alter his whole body.
"You may be right or wrong to risk dying," said the girl, simply;"the poor women in our village risk it whenever they have a baby.
You men are the other half of the world.
I know nothing aboutwhen you ought to die.
But surely if you are daring to try andfind God beyond the grave and appeal to Him--you ought to let Himfind you when He comes and stands there every morning in ourlittle church."
And placid as she was, she made a little gesture of argument, ofwhich the pathos wrung the heart.
M. Camille Bert was by no means placid.
Before that incompletegesture and frankly pleading face he retreated as if from thejaws of a dragon.
His dark black hair and beard looked utterlyunnatural against the startling pallor of his face.
When at lasthe said something it was: "O God!
I can't stand this!"
He did notsay it in French.
Nor did he, strictly speaking, say it inEnglish.
The truth (interesting only to anthropologists) is thathe said it in Scotch.
"There will be another mass in a matter of eight hours," saidMadeleine, with a sort of business eagerness and energy, "and youcan do it then before the fighting.
You must forgive me, but Iwas so frightened that you would not do it at all."
Bert seemed to crush his teeth together until they broke, andmanaged to say between them: "And why should you suppose that Ishouldn't do as you say--I mean not to do it at all?"
"You always go to Mass," answered the girl, opening her wide blueeyes, "and the Mass is very long and tiresome unless one lovesGod."
Then it was that Bert exploded with a brutality which might havecome from Count Gregory, his criminal opponent.
He advanced uponMadeleine with flaming eyes, and almost took her by the twoshoulders.
"I do not love God," he cried, speaking French withthe broadest Scotch accent; "I do not want to find Him; I do notthink He is there to be found.
I must burst up the show; I mustand will say everything.
You are the happiest and honestest thingI ever saw in this godless universe.
And I am the dirtiest andmost dishonest."
Madeleine looked at him doubtfully for an instant, and then saidwith a sudden simplicity and cheerfulness: "Oh, but if you arereally sorry it is all right.
If you are horribly sorry it is allthe better.
You have only to go and tell the priest so and hewill give you God out of his own hands."
"I hate your priest and I deny your God!"
cried the man, "and Itell you God is a lie and a fable and a mask.
And for the firsttime in my life I do not feel superior to God."
"What can it all mean?"
said Madeleine, in massive wonder.
"Because I am a fable also and a mask," said the man.
He had beenplucking fiercely at his black beard and hair all the time; nowhe suddenly plucked them off and flung them like moulted feathersin the mire.
This extraordinary spoliation left in the sunlightthe same face, but a much younger head--a head with closechestnut curls and a short chestnut beard.
"Now you know the truth," he answered, with hard eyes.
"I am acad who has played a crooked trick on a quiet village and adecent woman for a private reason of his own.
I might have playedit successfully on any other woman; I have hit the one woman onwhom it cannot be played.
It's just like my damned luck.
Theplain truth is," and here when he came to the plain truth heboggled and blundered as Evan had done in telling it to the girlin the motor-car.
"The plain truth is," he said at last, "that I am James Turnbullthe atheist.
The police are after me; not for atheism but forbeing ready to fight for it."
"I saw something about you in a newspaper," said the girl, with asimplicity which even surprise could never throw off its balance.
"Evan MacIan said there was a God," went on the other,stubbornly, "and I say there isn't.
And I have come to fight forthe fact that there is no God; it is for that that I have seenthis cursed island and your blessed face."
"You want me really to believe," said Madeleine, with partedlips, "that you think----""I want you to hate me!"
cried Turnbull, in agony.
"I want you tobe sick when you think of my name.
I am sure there is no God."
"But there is," said Madeleine, quite quietly, and rather withthe air of one telling children about an elephant.
"Why, Itouched His body only this morning."
"You touched a bit of bread," said Turnbull, biting his knuckles.
"Oh, I will say anything that can madden you!"
"You think it is only a bit of bread," said the girl, and herlips tightened ever so little.
"I know it is only a bit of bread," said Turnbull, with violence.
She flung back her open face and smiled.
"Then why did you refuseto eat it?"
she said.
James Turnbull made a little step backward, and for the firsttime in his life there seemed to break out and blaze in his headthoughts that were not his own.
"Why, how silly of them," cried out Madeleine, with quite aschoolgirl gaiety, "why, how silly of them to call _you_ ablasphemer!
Why, you have wrecked your whole business because youwould not commit blasphemy."
The man stood, a somewhat comic figure in his tragicbewilderment, with the honest red head of James Turnbull stickingout of the rich and fictitious garments of Camille Bert.
But thestartled pain of his face was strong enough to obliterate theoddity.
"You come down here," continued the lady, with that femaleemphasis which is so pulverizing in conversation and so feeble ata public meeting, "you and your MacIan come down here and put onfalse beards or noses in order to fight.
You pretend to be aCatholic commercial traveller from France.
Poor Mr. MacIan has topretend to be a dissolute nobleman from nowhere.
Your schemesucceeds; you pick a quite convincing quarrel; you arrange aquite respectable duel; the duel you have planned so long willcome off tomorrow with absolute certainty and safety.
And thenyou throw off your wig and throw up your scheme and throw overyour colleague, because I ask you to go into a building and eat abit of bread.
And _then_ you dare to tell me that you are surethere is nothing watching us.
Then you say you know there isnothing on the very altar you run away from.
You know----""I only know," said Turnbull, "that I must run away from you.
This has got beyond any talking."
And he plunged along into thevillage, leaving his black wig and beard lying behind him on theroad.
As the market-place opened before him he saw Count Gregory, thatdistinguished foreigner, standing and smoking in elegantmeditation at the corner of the local caf.
He immediately madehis way rapidly towards him, considering that a consultation wasurgent.
But he had hardly crossed half of that stony quadranglewhen a window burst open above him and a head was thrust out,shouting.
The man was in his woollen undershirt, but Turnbullknew the energetic, apologetic head of the sergeant of police.
Hepointed furiously at Turnbull and shouted his name.
A policemanran excitedly from under an archway and tried to collar him.
Twomen selling vegetables dropped their baskets and joined in thechase.
Turnbull dodged the constable, upset one of the men intohis own basket, and bounding towards the distinguished foreignCount, called to him clamorously: "Come on, MacIan, the hunt isup again."
The prompt reply of Count Gregory was to pull off his largeyellow whiskers and scatter them on the breeze with an air ofconsiderable relief.
Then he joined the flight of Turnbull, andeven as he did so, with one wrench of his powerful hands rent andsplit the strange, thick stick that he carried.
Inside it was anaked old-fashioned rapier.
The two got a good start up the roadbefore the whole town was awakened behind them; and half-way upit a similar transformation was seen to take place in Mr.Turnbull's singular umbrella.
The two had a long race for the harbour; but the English policewere heavy and the French inhabitants were indifferent.
In anycase, they got used to the notion of the road being clear; andjust as they had come to the cliffs MacIan banged into anothergentleman with unmistakable surprise.
How he knew he was anothergentleman merely by banging into him, must remain a mystery.
MacIan was a very poor and very sober Scotch gentleman.
The otherwas a very drunk and very wealthy English gentleman.
But therewas something in the staggered and openly embarrassed apologiesthat made them understand each other as readily and as quicklyand as much as two men talking French in the middle of China.
Thenearest expression of the type is that it either hits orapologizes; and in this case both apologized.
"You seem to be in a hurry," said the unknown Englishman, fallingback a step or two in order to laugh with an unnaturalheartiness.
"What's it all about, eh?"
Then before MacIan couldget past his sprawling and staggering figure he ran forward againand said with a sort of shouting and ear-shattering whisper: "Isay, my name is Wilkinson.
_You_ know--Wilkinson's Entire was mygrandfather.
Can't drink beer myself.
Liver."
And he shook hishead with extraordinary sagacity.
"We really are in a hurry, as you say," said MacIan, summoning asufficiently pleasant smile, "so if you will let us pass----""I'll tell you what, you fellows," said the sprawling gentleman,confidentially, while Evan's agonized ears heard behind him thefirst paces of the pursuit, "if you really are, as you say, in ahurry, I know what it is to be in a hurry--Lord, what a hurry Iwas in when we all came out of Cartwright's rooms--if you reallyare in a hurry"--and he seemed to steady his voice into a sort ofsolemnity--"if you are in a hurry, there's nothing like a goodyacht for a man in a hurry."
"No doubt you're right," said MacIan, and dashed past him indespair.
The head of the pursuing host was just showing over thetop of the hill behind him.
Turnbull had already ducked under theintoxicated gentleman's elbow and fled far in front.
"No, but look here," said Mr. Wilkinson, enthusiastically runningafter MacIan and catching him by the sleeve of his coat.
"If youwant to hurry you should take a yacht, and if"--he said, with aburst of rationality, like one leaping to a further point inlogic--"if you want a yacht--you can have mine."
Evan pulled up abruptly and looked back at him.
"We are really inthe devil of a hurry," he said, "and if you really have a yacht,the truth is that we would give our ears for it."
"You'll find it in harbour," said Wilkinson, struggling with hisspeech.
"Left side of harbour--called _Gibson Girl_--can't thinkwhy, old fellow, I never lent it you before."
With these words the benevolent Mr. Wilkinson fell flat on hisface in the road, but continued to laugh softly, and turnedtowards his flying companion a face of peculiar peace andbenignity.
Evan's mind went through a crisis of instantaneouscasuistry, in which it may be that he decided wrongly; but abouthow he decided his biographer can profess no doubt.
Two minutesafterwards he had overtaken Turnbull and told the tale; tenminutes afterwards he and Turnbull had somehow tumbled into theyacht called the _Gibson Girl_ and had somehow pushed off fromthe Isle of St. Loup.
XII.
THE DESERT ISLANDThose who happen to hold the view (and Mr. Evan MacIan, now aliveand comfortable, is among the number) that somethingsupernatural, some eccentric kindness from god or fairy hadguided our adventurers through all their absurd perils, mighthave found his strongest argument perhaps in their management ormismanagement of Mr. Wilkinson's yacht.
Neither of them had thesmallest qualification for managing such a vessel; but MacIan hada practical knowledge of the sea in much smaller and quitedifferent boats, while Turnbull had an abstract knowledge ofscience and some of its applications to navigation, which wasworse.
The presence of the god or fairy can only be deduced fromthe fact that they never definitely ran into anything, either aboat, a rock, a quicksand, or a man-of-war.
Apart from thisnegative description, their voyage would be difficult todescribe.
It took at least a fortnight, and MacIan, who wascertainly the shrewder sailor of the two, realized that they weresailing west into the Atlantic and were probably by this timepast the Scilly Isles.
How much farther they stood out into thewestern sea it was impossible to conjecture.
But they feltcertain, at least, that they were far enough into that awful gulfbetween us and America to make it unlikely that they would soonsee land again.
It was therefore with legitimate excitement thatone rainy morning after daybreak they saw that distinct shape ofa solitary island standing up against the encircling strip ofsilver which ran round the skyline and separated the grey andgreen of the billows from the grey and mauve of the morningclouds.
"What can it be?"
cried MacIan, in a dry-throated excitement.
"Ididn't know there were any Atlantic islands so far beyond theScillies--Good Lord, it can't be Madeira, yet?"
"I thought you were fond of legends and lies and fables," saidTurnbull, grimly.
"Perhaps it's Atlantis."
"Of course, it might be," answered the other, quite innocentlyand gravely; "but I never thought the story about Atlantis wasvery solidly established."
"Whatever it is, we are running on to it," said Turnbull,equably, "and we shall be shipwrecked twice, at any rate."
The naked-looking nose of land projecting from the unknown islandwas, indeed, growing larger and larger, like the trunk of someterrible and advancing elephant.
There seemed to be nothing inparticular, at least on this side of the island, except shoals ofshellfish lying so thick as almost to make it look like one ofthose toy grottos that the children make.
In one place, however,the coast offered a soft, smooth bay of sand, and even therudimentary ingenuity of the two amateur mariners managed to runup the little ship with her prow well on shore and her bowspritpointing upward, as in a sort of idiotic triumph.
They tumbled on shore and began to unload the vessel, setting thestores out in rows upon the sand with something of the solemnityof boys playing at pirates.
There were Mr. Wilkinson'scigar-boxes and Mr. Wilkinson's dozen of champagne and Mr.Wilkinson's tinned salmon and Mr. Wilkinson's tinned tongue andMr. Wilkinson's tinned sardines, and every sort of preservedthing that could be seen at the Army and Navy stores.
Then MacIanstopped with a jar of pickles in his hand and said abruptly:"I don't know why we're doing all this; I suppose we ought reallyto fall to and get it over."
Then he added more thoughtfully: "Of course this island seemsrather bare and the survivor----""The question is," said Turnbull, with cheerful speculation,"whether the survivor will be in a proper frame of mind forpotted prawns."
MacIan looked down at the rows of tins and bottles, and the cloudof doubt still lowered upon his face.
"You will permit me two liberties, my dear sir," said Turnbull atlast: "The first is to break open this box and light one of Mr.Wilkinson's excellent cigars, which will, I am sure, assist mymeditations; the second is to offer a penny for your thoughts; orrather to convulse the already complex finances of this island bybetting a penny that I know them."
"What on earth are you talking about?"
asked MacIan, listlessly,in the manner of an inattentive child.
"I know what you are really thinking, MacIan," repeated Turnbull,laughing.
"I know what I am thinking, anyhow.
And I rather fancyit's the same."
"What are you thinking?"
asked Evan.
"I am thinking and you are thinking," said Turnbull, "that it isdamned silly to waste all that champagne."
Something like the spectre of a smile appeared on the unsmilingvisage of the Gael; and he made at least no movement of dissent.
"We could drink all the wine and smoke all the cigars easily in aweek," said Turnbull; "and that would be to die feasting likeheroes."
"Yes, and there is something else," said MacIan, with slighthesitation.
"You see, we are on an almost unknown rock, lost inthe Atlantic.
The police will never catch us; but then neithermay the public ever hear of us; and that was one of the things wewanted."
Then, after a pause, he said, drawing in the sand withhis sword-point: "She may never hear of it at all."
"Well?"
inquired the other, puffing at his cigar.
"Well," said MacIan, "we might occupy a day or two in drawing upa thorough and complete statement of what we did and why we didit, and all about both our points of view.
Then we could leaveone copy on the island whatever happens to us and put another inan empty bottle and send it out to sea, as they do in the books."
"A good idea," said Turnbull, "and now let us finish unpacking."
As MacIan, a tall, almost ghostly figure, paced along the edge ofsand that ran round the islet, the purple but cloudy poetry whichwas his native element was piled up at its thickest upon hissoul.
The unique island and the endless sea emphasized the thingsolely as an epic.
There were no ladies or policemen here to givehim a hint either of its farce or its tragedy.
"Perhaps when the morning stars were made," he said to himself,"God built this island up from the bottom of the world to be atower and a theatre for the fight between yea and nay."
Then he wandered up to the highest level of the rock, where therewas a roof or plateau of level stone.
Half an hour afterwards,Turnbull found him clearing away the loose sand from thistable-land and making it smooth and even.
"We will fight up here, Turnbull," said MacIan, "when the timecomes.
And till the time comes this place shall be sacred."
"I thought of having lunch up here," said Turnbull, who had abottle of champagne in his hand.
"No, no--not up here," said MacIan, and came down from the heightquite hastily.
Before he descended, however, he fixed the twoswords upright, one at each end of the platform, as if they werehuman sentinels to guard it under the stars.
Then they came down and lunched plentifully in a nest of looserocks.
In the same place that night they supped more plentifullystill.
The smoke of Mr. Wilkinson's cigars went up ceaseless andstrong smelling, like a pagan sacrifice; the golden glories ofMr. Wilkinson's champagne rose to their heads and poured out ofthem in fancies and philosophies.
And occasionally they wouldlook up at the starlight and the rock and see the space guardedby the two cross-hilted swords, which looked like two blackcrosses at either end of a grave.
In this primitive and Homeric truce the week passed by; itconsisted almost entirely of eating, drinking, smoking, talking,and occasionally singing.
They wrote their records and cast loosetheir bottle.
They never ascended to the ominous plateau; theyhad never stood there save for that single embarrassed minutewhen they had had no time to take stock of the seascape or theshape of the land.
They did not even explore the island; forMacIan was partly concerned in prayer and Turnbull entirelyconcerned with tobacco; and both these forms of inspiration canbe enjoyed by the secluded and even the sedentary.
It was on agolden afternoon, the sun sinking over the sea, rayed like thevery head of Apollo, when Turnbull tossed off the last half-pintfrom the emptied Wilkinsonian bottle, hurled the bottle into thesea with objectless energy, and went up to where his sword stoodwaiting for him on the hill.
MacIan was already standing heavilyby his with bent head and eyes reading the ground.
He had noteven troubled to throw a glance round the island or the horizon.
But Turnbull being of a more active and birdlike type of mind didthrow a glance round the scene.
The consequence of which was thathe nearly fell off the rock.
On three sides of this shelly and sandy islet the sea stretchedblue and infinite without a speck of land or sail; the same asTurnbull had first seen it, except that the tide being out itshowed a few yards more of slanting sand under the roots of therocks.
But on the fourth side the island exhibited a moreextraordinary feature.
In fact, it exhibited the extraordinaryfeature of not being an island at all.
A long, curving neck ofsand, as smooth and wet as the neck of the sea serpent, ran outinto the sea and joined their rock to a line of low, billowing,and glistening sand-hills, which the sinking sea had just baredto the sun.
Whether they were firm sand or quicksand it wasdifficult to guess; but there was at least no doubt that they layon the edge of some larger land; for colourless hills appearedfaintly behind them and no sea could be seen beyond.
"Sakes alive!"
cried Turnbull, with rolling eyes; "this ain't anisland in the Atlantic.
We've butted the bally continent ofAmerica."
MacIan turned his head, and his face, already pale, grew a shadepaler.
He was by this time walking in a world of omens andhieroglyphics, and he could not read anything but what wasbaffling or menacing in this brown gigantic arm of the earthstretched out into the sea to seize him.
"MacIan," said Turnbull, in his temperate way, "whatever oureternal interrupted tete-a-tetes have taught us or not taught us,at least we need not fear the charge of fear.
If it is essentialto your emotions, I will cheerfully finish the fight here andnow; but I must confess that if you kill me here I shall die withmy curiosity highly excited and unsatisfied upon a minor point ofgeography."
"I do not want to stop now," said the other, in his elephantinesimplicity, "but we must stop for a moment, because it is asign--perhaps it is a miracle.
We must see what is at the end ofthe road of sand; it may be a bridge built across the gulf byGod."
"So long as you gratify my query," said Turnbull, laughing andletting back his blade into the sheath, "I do not care for whatreason you choose to stop."
They clambered down the rocky peninsula and trudged along thesandy isthmus with the plodding resolution of men who seemedalmost to have made up their minds to be wanderers on the face ofthe earth.
Despite Turnbull's air of scientific eagerness, he wasreally the less impatient of the two; and the Highlander went onwell ahead of him with passionate strides.
By the time they hadwalked for about half an hour in the ups and downs of thosedreary sands, the distance between the two had lengthened andMacIan was only a tall figure silhouetted for an instant upon thecrest of some sand-dune and then disappearing behind it.
Thisrather increased the Robinson Crusoe feeling in Mr. Turnbull, andhe looked about almost disconsolately for some sign of life.
Whatsort of life he expected it to be if it appeared, he did not veryclearly know.
He has since confessed that he thinks that in hissubconsciousness he expected an alligator.
The first sign of life that he did see, however, was somethingmore extraordinary than the largest alligator.
It was nothingless than the notorious Mr. Evan MacIan coming bounding backacross the sand-heaps breathless, without his cap and keeping thesword in his hand only by a habit now quite hardened.
"Take care, Turnbull," he cried out from a good distance as heran, "I've seen a native."
"A native?"
repeated his companion, whose scenery had of latebeen chiefly of shellfish, "what the deuce!
Do you mean anoyster?"
"No," said MacIan, stopping and breathing hard, "I mean a savage.
A black man."
"Why, where did you see him?"
asked the staring editor.
"Over there--behind that hill," said the gasping MacIan.
"He putup his black head and grinned at me."
Turnbull thrust his hands through his red hair like one who givesup the world as a bad riddle.
"Lord love a duck," said he, "canit be Jamaica?"
Then glancing at his companion with a small frown, as of oneslightly suspicious, he said: "I say, don't think me rude--butyou're a visionary kind of fellow--and then we drank a greatdeal.
Do you mind waiting here while I go and see for myself?"
"Shout if you get into trouble," said the Celt, with composure;"you will find it as I say."
Turnbull ran off ahead with a rapidity now far greater than hisrival's, and soon vanished over the disputed sand-hill.
Then fiveminutes passed, and then seven minutes; and MacIan bit his lipand swung his sword, and the other did not reappear.
Finally,with a Gaelic oath, Evan started forward to the rescue, andalmost at the same moment the small figure of the missing manappeared on the ridge against the sky.
Even at that distance, however, there was something odd about hisattitude; so odd that MacIan continued to make his way in thatdirection.
It looked as if he were wounded; or, still more, as ifhe were ill.
He wavered as he came down the slope and seemedflinging himself into peculiar postures.
But it was only when hecame within three feet of MacIan's face, that that observer ofmankind fully realized that Mr. James Turnbull was roaring withlaughter.
"You are quit right," sobbed that wholly demoralized journalist.
"He's black, oh, there's no doubt the black's all right--as faras it goes."
And he went off again into convulsions of hishumorous ailment.
"What ever is the matter with you?"
asked MacIan, with sternimpatience.
"Did you see the nigger----""I saw the nigger," gasped Turnbull.
"I saw the splendidbarbarian Chief.
I saw the Emperor of Ethiopia--oh, I saw him allright.
The nigger's hands and face are a lovely colour--and thenigger----" And he was overtaken once more.
"Well, well, well," said Evan, stamping each monosyllable on thesand, "what about the nigger?"
"Well, the truth is," said Turnbull, suddenly and startlingly,becoming quite grave and precise, "the truth is, the nigger is aMargate nigger, and we are now on the edge of the Isle of Thanet,a few miles from Margate."
Then he had a momentary return of his hysteria and said: "I say,old boy, I should like to see a chart of our fortnight's cruisein Wilkinson's yacht."
MacIan had no smile in answer, but his eager lips opened as ifparched for the truth.
"You mean to say," he began----"Yes, I mean to say," said Turnbull, "and I mean to say somethingfunnier still.
I have learnt everything I wanted to know from thepartially black musician over there, who has taken a run in hiswar-paint to meet a friend in a quiet pub along the coast--thenoble savage has told me all about it.
The bottle containing ourdeclaration, doctrines, and dying sentiments was washed up onMargate beach yesterday in the presence of one alderman, twobathing-machine men, three policemen, seven doctors, and ahundred and thirteen London clerks on a holiday, to all of whom,whether directly or indirectly, our composition gave enormousliterary pleasure.
Buck up, old man, this story of ours is aswitchback.
I have begun to understand the pulse and the time ofit; now we are up in a cathedral and then we are down in atheatre, where they only play farces.
Come, I am quitereconciled--let us enjoy the farce."
But MacIan said nothing, and an instant afterwards Turnbullhimself called out in an entirely changed voice: "Oh, this isdamnable!
This is not to be borne!"
MacIan followed his eye along the sand-hills.
He saw what lookedlike the momentary and waving figure of the nigger minstrel, andthen he saw a heavy running policeman take the turn of thesand-hill with the smooth solemnity of a railway train.
XIII.
THE GARDEN OF PEACEUp to this instant Evan MacIan had really understood nothing; butwhen he saw the policeman he saw everything.
He saw his enemies,all the powers and princes of the earth.
He suddenly altered froma staring statue to a leaping man of the mountains.
"We must break away from him here," he cried, briefly, and wentlike a whirlwind over the sand ridge in a straight line and at aparticular angle.
When the policeman had finished his admirablerailway curve, he found a wall of failing sand between him andthe pursued.
By the time he had scaled it thrice, slid downtwice, and crested it in the third effort, the two flying figureswere far in front.
They found the sand harder farther on; itbegan to be crusted with scraps of turf and in a few moments theywere flying easily over an open common of rank sea-grass.
Theyhad no easy business, however; for the bottle which they had soinnocently sent into the chief gate of Thanet had called to lifethe police of half a county on their trail.
From every sideacross the grey-green common figures could be seen running andclosing in; and it was only when MacIan with his big body brokedown the tangled barrier of a little wood, as men break down adoor with the shoulder; it was only when they vanished crashinginto the underworld of the black wood, that their hunters wereeven instantaneously thrown off the scent.
At the risk of struggling a little longer like flies in thatblack web of twigs and trunks, Evan (who had an instinct of thehunter or the hunted) took an incalculable course through theforest, which let them out at last by a forest opening--quiteforgotten by the leaders of the chase.
They ran a mile or twofarther along the edge of the wood until they reached another andsomewhat similar opening.
Then MacIan stood utterly still andlistened, as animals listen, for every sound in the universe.
Then he said: "We are quit of them."
And Turnbull said: "Whereshall we go now?"
MacIan looked at the silver sunset that was closing in, barred byplumy lines of purple cloud; he looked at the high tree-tops thatcaught the last light and at the birds going heavily homeward,just as if all these things were bits of written advice that hecould read.
Then he said: "The best place we can go to is to bed.
If we canget some sleep in this wood, now everyone has cleared out of it,it will be worth a handicap of two hundred yards tomorrow."
Turnbull, who was exceptionally lively and laughing in hisdemeanour, kicked his legs about like a schoolboy and said he didnot want to go to sleep.
He walked incessantly and talked verybrilliantly.
And when at last he lay down on the hard earth,sleep struck him senseless like a hammer.
Indeed, he needed the strongest sleep he could get; for the earthwas still full of darkness and a kind of morning fog when hisfellow-fugitive shook him awake.
"No more sleep, I'm afraid," said Evan, in a heavy, almostsubmissive, voice of apology.
"They've gone on past us rightenough for a good thirty miles; but now they've found out theirmistake, and they're coming back."
"Are you sure?"
said Turnbull, sitting up and rubbing his redeyebrows with his hand.
The next moment, however, he had jumped up alive and leaping likea man struck with a shock of cold water, and he was plungingafter MacIan along the woodland path.
The shape of their oldfriend the constable had appeared against the pearl and pink ofthe sunrise.
Somehow, it always looked a very funny shape whenseen against the sunrise.
*                    *                   *A wash of weary daylight was breaking over the country-side, andthe fields and roads were full of white mist--the kind of whitemist that clings in corners like cotton wool.
The empty road,along which the chase had taken its turn, was overshadowed on oneside by a very high discoloured wall, stained, and streakedgreen, as with seaweed--evidently the high-shouldered sentinel ofsome great gentleman's estate.
A yard or two from the wall ranparallel to it a linked and tangled line of lime-trees, forming akind of cloister along the side of the road.
It was under thisbranching colonnade that the two fugitives fled, almost concealedfrom their pursuers by the twilight, the mist and the leapingzoetrope of shadows.
Their feet, though beating the groundfuriously, made but a faint noise; for they had kicked away theirboots in the wood; their long, antiquated weapons made no jingleor clatter, for they had strapped them across their backs likeguitars.
They had all the advantages that invisibility andsilence can add to speed.
A hundred and fifty yards behind them down the centre of theempty road the first of their pursuers came pounding andpanting--a fat but powerful policeman who had distanced all therest.
He came on at a splendid pace for so portly a figure; but,like all heavy bodies in motion, he gave the impression that itwould be easier for him to increase his pace than to slacken itsuddenly.
Nothing short of a brick wall could have abruptlybrought him up.
Turnbull turned his head slightly and foundbreath to say something to MacIan.
MacIan nodded.
Pursuer and pursued were fixed in their distance as they fled,for some quarter of a mile, when they came to a place where twoor three of the trees grew twistedly together, making a specialobscurity.
Past this place the pursuing policeman went thunderingwithout thought or hesitation.
But he was pursuing his shadow orthe wind; for Turnbull had put one foot in a crack of the treeand gone up it as quickly and softly as a cat.
Somewhat morelaboriously but in equal silence the long legs of the Highlanderhad followed; and crouching in crucial silence in the cloud ofleaves, they saw the whole posse of their pursuers go by and dieinto the dust and mists of the distance.
The white vapour lay, as it often does, in lean and palpablelayers; and even the head of the tree was above it in thehalf-daylight, like a green ship swinging on a sea of foam.
Buthigher yet behind them, and readier to catch the first coming ofthe sun, ran the rampart of the top of the wall, which in theirexcitement of escape looked at once indispensable andunattainable, like the wall of heaven.
Here, however, it wasMacIan's turn to have the advantage; for, though lesslight-limbed and feline, he was longer and stronger in the arms.
In two seconds he had tugged up his chin over the wall like ahorizontal bar; the next he sat astride of it, like a horse ofstone.
With his assistance Turnbull vaulted to the same perch,and the two began cautiously to shift along the wall in thedirection by which they had come, doubling on their tracks tothrow off the last pursuit.
MacIan could not rid himself of thefancy of bestriding a steed; the long, grey coping of the wallshot out in front of him, like the long, grey neck of somenightmare Rosinante.
He had the quaint thought that he andTurnbull were two knights on one steed on the old shield of theTemplars.
The nightmare of the stone horse was increased by the white fog,which seemed thicker inside the wall than outside.
They couldmake nothing of the enclosure upon which they were partialtrespassers, except that the green and crooked branches of a bigapple-tree came crawling at them out of the mist, like thetentacles of some green cuttlefish.
Anything would serve,however, that was likely to confuse their trail, so they bothdecided without need of words to use this tree also as aladder--a ladder of descent.
When they dropped from the lowestbranch to the ground their stockinged feet felt hard gravelbeneath them.
They had alighted in the middle of a very broad garden path, andthe clearing mist permitted them to see the edge of awell-clipped lawn.
Though the white vapour was still a veil, itwas like the gauzy veil of a transformation scene in a pantomime;for through it there glowed shapeless masses of colour, masseswhich might be clouds of sunrise or mosaics of gold and crimson,or ladies robed in ruby and emerald draperies.
As it thinned yetfarther they saw that it was only flowers; but flowers in suchinsolent mass and magnificence as can seldom be seen out of thetropics.
Purple and crimson rhododendrons rose arrogantly, likerampant heraldic animals against their burning background oflaburnum gold.
The roses were red hot; the clematis was, so tospeak, blue hot.
And yet the mere whiteness of the syringa seemedthe most violent colour of all.
As the golden sunlight graduallyconquered the mists, it had really something of the sensationalsweetness of the slow opening of the gates of Eden.
MacIan, whosemind was always haunted with such seraphic or titanic parallels,made some such remark to his companion.
But Turnbull only cursedand said that it was the back garden of some damnable rich man.
When the last haze had faded from the ordered paths, the openlawns, and the flaming flower-beds, the two realized, not withoutan abrupt re-examination of their position, that they were notalone in the garden.
Down the centre of the central garden path, preceded by a bluecloud from a cigarette, was walking a gentleman who evidentlyunderstood all the relish of a garden in the very early morning.
He was a slim yet satisfied figure, clad in a suit of pale-greytweed, so subdued that the pattern was imperceptible--a costumethat was casual but not by any means careless.
His face, whichwas reflective and somewhat over-refined, was the face of a quiteelderly man, though his stringy hair and moustache were stillquite yellow.
A double eye-glass, with a broad, black ribbon,drooped from his aquiline nose, and he smiled, as he communedwith himself, with a self-content which was rare and almostirritating.
The straw panama on his head was many shades shabbierthan his clothes, as if he had caught it up by accident.
It needed the full shock of the huge shadow of MacIan, fallingacross his sunlit path, to rouse him from his smiling reverie.
When this had fallen on him he lifted his head a little andblinked at the intruders with short-sighted benevolence, but withfar less surprise than might have been expected.
He was agentleman; that is, he had social presence of mind, whether forkindness or for insolence.
"Can I do anything for you?"
he said, at last.
MacIan bowed.
"You can extend to us your pardon," he said, for healso came of a whole race of gentlemen--of gentlemen withoutshirts to their backs.
"I am afraid we are trespassing.
We havejust come over the wall."
"Over the wall?"
repeated the smiling old gentleman, stillwithout letting his surprise come uppermost.
"I suppose I am not wrong, sir," continued MacIan, "in supposingthat these grounds inside the wall belong to you?"
The man in the panama looked at the ground and smokedthoughtfully for a few moments, after which he said, with a sortof matured conviction:"Yes, certainly; the grounds inside the wall really belong to me,and the grounds outside the wall, too."
"A large proprietor, I imagine," said Turnbull, with a truculenteye.
"Yes," answered the old gentleman, looking at him with a steadysmile.
"A large proprietor."
Turnbull's eye grew even more offensive, and he began biting hisred beard; but MacIan seemed to recognize a type with which hecould deal and continued quite easily:"I am sure that a man like you will not need to be told that onesees and does a good many things that do not get into thenewspapers.
Things which, on the whole, had better not get intothe newspapers."
The smile of the large proprietor broadened for a moment underhis loose, light moustache, and the other continued withincreased confidence:"One sometimes wants to have it out with another man.
The policewon't allow it in the streets--and then there's the CountyCouncil--and in the fields even nothing's allowed but posters ofpills.
But in a gentleman's garden, now----"The strange gentleman smiled again and said, easily enough: "Doyou want to fight?
What do you want to fight about?"
MacIan had understood his man pretty well up to that point; aninstinct common to all men with the aristocratic tradition ofEurope had guided him.
He knew that the kind of man who in hisown back garden wears good clothes and spoils them with a bad hatis not the kind of man who has an abstract horror of illegalactions of violence or the evasion of the police.
But a man mayunderstand ragging and yet be very far from understandingreligious ragging.
This seeming host of theirs might comprehend aquarrel of husband and lover or a difficulty at cards or evenescape from a pursuing tailor; but it still remained doubtfulwhether he would feel the earth fail under him in that earthquakeinstant when the Virgin is compared to a goddess of Mesopotamia.
Even MacIan, therefore (whose tact was far from being his strongpoint), felt the necessity for some compromise in the mode ofapproach.
At last he said, and even then with hesitation:"We are fighting about God; there can be nothing so important asthat."
The tilted eye-glasses of the old gentleman fell abruptly fromhis nose, and he thrust his aristocratic chin so far forward thathis lean neck seemed to shoot out longer like a telescope.
"About God?"
he queried, in a key completely new.
"Look here!"
cried Turnbull, taking his turn roughly, "I'll tellyou what it's all about.
I think that there's no God.
I take itthat it's nobody's business but mine--or God's, if there is one.
This young gentleman from the Highlands happens to think thatit's his business.
In consequence, he first takes a walking-stickand smashes my shop; then he takes the same walking-stick andtries to smash me.
To this I naturally object.
I suggest that ifit comes to that we should both have sticks.
He improves on thesuggestion and proposes that we should both have steel-pointedsticks.
The police (with characteristic unreasonableness) willnot accept either of our proposals; the result is that we runabout dodging the police and have jumped over our garden wallinto your magnificent garden to throw ourselves on yourmagnificent hospitality."
The face of the old gentleman had grown redder and redder duringthis address, but it was still smiling; and when he broke out itwas with a kind of guffaw.
"So you really want to fight with drawn swords in my garden," heasked, "about whether there is really a God?"
"Why not?"
said MacIan, with his simple monstrosity of speech;"all man's worship began when the Garden of Eden was founded."
"Yes, by----!"
said Turnbull, with an oath, "and ended when theZoological Gardens were founded."
"In this garden!
In my presence!"
cried the stranger, stamping upand down the gravel and choking with laughter," whether there isa God!"
And he went stamping up and down the garden, making itecho with his unintelligible laughter.
Then he came back to themmore composed and wiping his eyes.
"Why, how small the world is!"
he cried at last.
"I can settlethe whole matter.
Why, I am God!"
And he suddenly began to kick and wave his well-clad legs aboutthe lawn.
"You are what?"
repeated Turnbull, in a tone which is beyonddescription.
"Why, God, of course!"
answered the other, thoroughly amused.
"How funny it is to think that you have tumbled over a gardenwall and fallen exactly on the right person!
You might have gonefloundering about in all sorts of churches and chapels andcolleges and schools of philosophy looking for some evidence ofthe existence of God.
Why, there is no evidence, except seeinghim.
And now you've seen him.
You've seen him dance!"
And the obliging old gentleman instantly stood on one leg withoutrelaxing at all the grave and cultured benignity of hisexpression.
"I understood that this garden----" began the bewildered MacIan.
"Quite so!
Quite so!"
said the man on one leg, nodding gravely.
"I said this garden belonged to me and the land outside it.
Sothey do.
So does the country beyond that and the sea beyond thatand all the rest of the earth.
So does the moon.
So do the sunand stars."
And he added, with a smile of apology: "You see, I'mGod."
Turnbull and MacIan looked at him for one moment with a sort ofnotion that perhaps he was not too old to be merely playing thefool.
But after staring steadily for an instant Turnbull saw thehard and horrible earnestness in the man's eyes behind all hisempty animation.
Then Turnbull looked very gravely at the strictgravel walls and the gay flower-beds and the long rectangularred-brick building, which the mist had left evident beyond them.
Then he looked at MacIan.
Almost at the same moment another man came walking quickly roundthe regal clump of rhododendrons.
He had the look of a prosperousbanker, wore a good tall silk hat, was almost stout enough toburst the buttons of a fine frock-coat; but he was talking tohimself, and one of his elbows had a singular outward jerk as hewent by.
XIV.
A MUSEUM OF SOULSThe man with the good hat and the jumping elbow went by veryquickly; yet the man with the bad hat, who thought he was God,overtook him.
He ran after him and jumped over a bed of geraniumsto catch him.
"I beg your Majesty's pardon," he said, with mock humility, "buthere is a quarrel which you ought really to judge."
Then as he led the heavy, silk-hatted man back towards the group,he caught MacIan's ear in order to whisper: "This poor gentlemanis mad; he thinks he is Edward VII."
At this the self-appointedCreator slightly winked.
"Of course you won't trust him much;come to me for everything.
But in my position one has to meet somany people.
One has to be broadminded."
The big banker in the black frock-coat and hat was standing quitegrave and dignified on the lawn, save for his slight twitch ofone limb, and he did not seem by any means unworthy of the partwhich the other promptly forced upon him.
"My dear fellow," said the man in the straw hat, "these twogentlemen are going to fight a duel of the utmost importance.
Your own royal position and my much humbler one surely indicateus as the proper seconds.
Seconds--yes, seconds----" and herethe speaker was once more shaken with his old malady oflaughter.
"Yes, you and I are both seconds--and these two gentlemen canobviously fight in front of us.
You, he-he, are the king.
I amGod; really, they could hardly have better supporters.
They havecome to the right place."
Then Turnbull, who had been staring with a frown at the freshturf, burst out with a rather bitter laugh and cried, throwinghis red head in the air:"Yes, by God, MacIan, I think we have come to the right place!"
And MacIan answered, with an adamantine stupidity:"Any place is the right place where they will let us do it."
There was a long stillness, and their eyes involuntarily took inthe landscape, as they had taken in all the landscapes of theireverlasting combat; the bright, square garden behind the shop;the whole lift and leaning of the side of Hampstead Heath; thelittle garden of the decadent choked with flowers; the square ofsand beside the sea at sunrise.
They both felt at the same momentall the breadth and blossoming beauty of that paradise, thecoloured trees, the natural and restful nooks and also the greatwall of stone--more awful than the wall of China--from which noflesh could flee.
Turnbull was moodily balancing his sword in his hand as the otherspoke; then he started, for a mouth whispered quite close to hisear.
With a softness incredible in any cat, the huge, heavy manin the black hat and frock-coat had crept across the lawn fromhis own side and was saying in his ear: "Don't trust that secondof yours.
He's mad and not so mad, either; for he frightfullycunning and sharp.
Don't believe the story he tells you about whyI hate him.
I know the story he'll tell; I overheard it when thehousekeeper was talking to the postman.
It's too long to talkabout now, and I expect we're watched, but----"Something in Turnbull made him want suddenly to be sick on thegrass; the mere healthy and heathen horror of the unclean; themere inhumane hatred of the inhuman state of madness.
He seemedto hear all round him the hateful whispers of that place,innumerable as leaves whispering in the wind, and each of themtelling eagerly some evil that had not happened or some terrificsecret which was not true.
All the rationalist and plain manrevolted within him against bowing down for a moment in thatforest of deception and egotistical darkness.
He wanted to blowup that palace of delusions with dynamite; and in some wild way,which I will not defend, he tried to do it.
He looked across at MacIan and said: "Oh, I can't stand this!"
"Can't stand what?"
asked his opponent, eyeing him doubtfully.
"Shall we say the atmosphere?"
replied Turnbull; "one can't useuncivil expressions even to a--deity.
The fact is, I don't likehaving God for my second."
"Sir!"
said that being in a state of great offence, "in myposition I am not used to having my favours refused.
Do you knowwho I am?"
The editor of _The Atheist_ turned upon him like one who has lostall patience, and exploded: "Yes, you are God, aren't you?"
hesaid, abruptly, "why do we have two sets of teeth?"
"Teeth?"
spluttered the genteel lunatic; "teeth?"
"Yes," cried Turnbull, advancing on him swiftly and with animatedgestures, "why does teething hurt?
Why do growing pains hurt?
Whyare measles catching?
Why does a rose have thorns?
Why dorhinoceroses have horns?
Why is the horn on the top of the nose?
Why haven't I a horn on the top of my nose, eh?"
And he struckthe bridge of his nose smartly with his forefinger to indicatethe place of the omission and then wagged the finger menacinglyat the Creator.
"I've often wanted to meet you," he resumed, sternly, after apause, "to hold you accountable for all the idiocy and cruelty ofthis muddled and meaningless world of yours.
You make a hundredseeds and only one bears fruit.
You make a million worlds andonly one seems inhabited.
What do you mean by it, eh?
What do youmean by it?"
The unhappy lunatic had fallen back before this quite novel formof attack, and lifted his burnt-out cigarette almost like onewarding off a blow.
Turnbull went on like a torrent.
"A man died yesterday in Ealing.
You murdered him.
A girl had thetoothache in Croydon.
You gave it her.
Fifty sailors were drownedoff Selsey Bill.
You scuttled their ship.
What have you got tosay for yourself, eh?"
The representative of omnipotence looked as if he had left mostof these things to his subordinates; he passed a hand over hiswrinkling brow and said in a voice much saner than any he had yetused:"Well, if you dislike my assistance, of course--perhaps the othergentleman----""The other gentleman," cried Turnbull, scornfully, "is asubmissive and loyal and obedient gentleman.
He likes the peoplewho wear crowns, whether of diamonds or of stars.
He believes inthe divine right of kings, and it is appropriate enough that heshould have the king for his second.
But it is not appropriate tome that I should have God for my second.
God is not good enough.
I dislike and I deny the divine right of kings.
But I dislikemore and I deny more the divine right of divinity."
Then after a pause in which he swallowed his passion, he said toMacIan: "You have got the right second, anyhow."
The Highlander did not answer, but stood as if thunderstruck withone long and heavy thought.
Then at last he turned abruptly tohis second in the silk hat and said: "Who are you?"
The man in the silk hat blinked and bridled in affected surprise,like one who was in truth accustomed to be doubted.
"I am King Edward VII," he said, with shaky arrogance.
"Do youdoubt my word?"
"I do not doubt it in the least," answered MacIan.
"Then, why," said the large man in the silk hat, trembling fromhead to foot, "why do you wear your hat before the king?"
"Why should I take it off," retorted MacIan, with equal heat,"before a usurper?"
Turnbull swung round on his heel.
"Well, really," he said, "Ithought at least you were a loyal subject."
"I am the only loyal subject," answered the Gael.
"For nearlythirty years I have walked these islands and have not foundanother."
"You are always hard to follow," remarked Turnbull, genially,"and sometimes so much so as to be hardly worth following."
"I alone am loyal," insisted MacIan; "for I alone am inrebellion.
I am ready at any instant to restore the Stuarts.
Iam ready at any instant to defy the Hanoverian brood--and I defyit now even when face to face with the actual ruler of theenormous British Empire!"
And folding his arms and throwing back his lean, hawklike face,he haughtily confronted the man with the formal frock-coat andthe eccentric elbow.
"What right had you stunted German squires," he cried, "tointerfere in a quarrel between Scotch and English and Irishgentlemen?
Who made you, whose fathers could not splutter Englishwhile they walked in Whitehall, who made you the judge betweenthe republic of Sidney and the monarchy of Montrose?
What hadyour sires to do with England that they should have the fouloffering of the blood of Derwentwater and the heart of JimmyDawson?
Where are the corpses of Culloden?
Where is the blood ofLochiel?"
MacIan advanced upon his opponent with a bony andpointed finger, as if indicating the exact pocket in which theblood of that Cameron was probably kept; and Edward VII fell backa few paces in considerable confusion.
"What good have you ever done to us?"
he continued in harsher andharsher accents, forcing the other back towards the flower-beds.
"What good have you ever done, you race of German sausages?
Yardsof barbarian etiquette, to throttle the freedom of aristocracy!
Gas of northern metaphysics to blow up Broad Church bishops likeballoons.
Bad pictures and bad manners and pantheism and theAlbert Memorial.
Go back to Hanover, you humbug?
Go to----"Before the end of this tirade the arrogance of the monarch hadentirely given way; he had fairly turned tail and was trundlingaway down the path.
MacIan strode after him still preaching andflourishing his large, lean hands.
The other two remained in thecentre of the lawn--Turnbull in convulsions of laughter, thelunatic in convulsions of disgust.
Almost at the same moment athird figure came stepping swiftly across the lawn.
The advancing figure walked with a stoop, and yet somehow flunghis forked and narrow beard forward.
That carefully cut andpointed yellow beard was, indeed, the most emphatic thing abouthim.
When he clasped his hands behind him, under the tails of hiscoat, he would wag his beard at a man like a big forefinger.
Itperformed almost all his gestures; it was more important than theglittering eye-glasses through which he looked or the beautifulbleating voice in which he spoke.
His face and neck were of alusty red, but lean and stringy; he always wore his expensivegold-rim eye-glasses slightly askew upon his aquiline nose; andhe always showed two gleaming foreteeth under his moustache, in asmile so perpetual as to earn the reputation of a sneer.
But forthe crooked glasses his dress was always exquisite; and but forthe smile he was perfectly and perennially depressed.
"Don't you think," said the new-comer, with a sort ofsupercilious entreaty, "that we had better all come intobreakfast?
It is such a mistake to wait for breakfast.
It spoilsone's temper so much."
"Quite so," replied Turnbull, seriously.
"There seems almost to have been a little quarrelling here," saidthe man with the goatish beard.
"It is rather a long story," said Turnbull, smiling.
"Originally,it might be called a phase in the quarrel between science andreligion."
The new-comer started slightly, and Turnbull replied to thequestion on his face.
"Oh, yes," he said, "I am science!"
"I congratulate you heartily," answered the other, "I am DoctorQuayle."
Turnbull's eyes did not move, but he realized that the man in thepanama hat had lost all his ease of a landed proprietor and hadwithdrawn to a distance of thirty yards, where he stood glaringwith all the contraction of fear and hatred that can stiffen acat.
*                    *                   *MacIan was sitting somewhat disconsolately on a stump of tree,his large black head half buried in his large brown hands, whenTurnbull strode up to him chewing a cigarette.
He did not lookup, but his comrade and enemy addressed him like one who mustfree himself of his feelings.
"Well, I hope, at any rate," he said, "that you like yourprecious religion now.
I hope you like the society of this poordevil whom your damned tracts and hymns and priests have drivenout of his wits.
Five men in this place, they tell me, five menin this place who might have been fathers of families, and everyone of them thinks he is God the Father.
Oh!
you may talk aboutthe ugliness of science, but there is no one here who thinks heis Protoplasm."
"They naturally prefer a bright part," said MacIan, wearily.
"Protoplasm is not worth going mad about."
"At least," said Turnbull, savagely, "it was your Jesus Christwho started all this bosh about being God."
For one instant MacIan opened the eyes of battle; then histightened lips took a crooked smile and he said, quite calmly:"No, the idea is older; it was Satan who first said that he wasGod."
"Then, what," asked Turnbull, very slowly, as he softly picked aflower, "what is the difference between Christ and Satan?"
"It is quite simple," replied the Highlander.
"Christ descendedinto hell; Satan fell into it."
"Does it make much odds?"
asked the free-thinker.
"It makes all the odds," said the other.
"One of them wanted togo up and went down; the other wanted to go down and went up.
Agod can be humble, a devil can only be humbled."
"Why are you always wanting to humble a man?"
asked Turnbull,knitting his brows.
"It affects me as ungenerous."
"Why were you wanting to humble a god when you found him in thisgarden?"
asked MacIan.
"That was an extreme case of impudence," said Turnbull.
"Granting the man his almighty pretensions, I think he was verymodest," said MacIan.
"It is we who are arrogant, who know we areonly men.
The ordinary man in the street is more of a monsterthan that poor fellow; for the man in the street treats himselfas God Almighty when he knows he isn't.
He expects the universeto turn round him, though he knows he isn't the centre."
"Well," said Turnbull, sitting down on the grass, "this is adigression, anyhow.
What I want to point out is, that your faithdoes end in asylums and my science doesn't."
"Doesn't it, by George!"
cried MacIan, scornfully.
"There are afew men here who are mad on God and a few who are mad on theBible.
But I bet there are many more who are simply mad onmadness."
"Do you really believe it?"
asked the other.
"Scores of them, I should say," answered MacIan.
"Fellows whohave read medical books or fellows whose fathers and uncles hadsomething hereditary in their heads--the whole air they breatheis mad."
"All the same," said Turnbull, shrewdly, "I bet you haven't founda madman of that sort."
"I bet I have!"
cried Evan, with unusual animation.
"I've beenwalking about the garden talking to a poor chap all the morning.
He's simply been broken down and driven raving by your damnedscience.
Talk about believing one is God--why, it's quite an old,comfortable, fireside fancy compared with the sort of things thisfellow believes.
He believes that there is a God, but that he isbetter than God.
He says God will be afraid to face him.
He saysone is always progressing beyond the best.
He put his arm in mineand whispered in my ear, as if it were the apocalypse: 'Nevertrust a God that you can't improve on.'"
"What can he have meant?"
said the atheist, with all his logicawake.
"Obviously one should not trust any God that one canimprove on."
"It is the way he talks," said MacIan, almost indifferently; "buthe says rummier things than that.
He says that a man's doctorought to decide what woman he marries; and he says that childrenought not to be brought up by their parents, because a physicalpartiality will then distort the judgement of the educator."
"Oh, dear!"
said Turnbull, laughing, "you have certainly comeacross a pretty bad case, and incidentally proved your own.
Isuppose some men do lose their wits through science as throughlove and other good things."
"And he says," went on MacIan, monotonously, "that he cannot seewhy anyone should suppose that a triangle is a three-sidedfigure.
He says that on some higher plane----"Turnbull leapt to his feet as by an electric shock.
"I nevercould have believed," he cried, "that you had humour enough totell a lie.
You've gone a bit too far, old man, with your littlejoke.
Even in a lunatic asylum there can't be anybody who, havingthought about the matter, thinks that a triangle has not gotthree sides.
If he exists he must be a new era in humanpsychology.
But he doesn't exist."
"I will go and fetch him," said MacIan, calmly; "I left the poorfellow wandering about by the nasturtium bed."
MacIan vanished, and in a few moments returned, trailing with himhis own discovery among lunatics, who was a slender man with afixed smile and an unfixed and rolling head.
He had a goatlikebeard just long enough to be shaken in a strong wind.
Turnbullsprang to his feet and was like one who is speechless throughchoking a sudden shout of laughter.
"Why, you great donkey," he shouted, in an ear-shatteringwhisper, "that's not one of the patients at all.
That's one ofthe doctors."
Evan looked back at the leering head with the long-pointed beardand repeated the word inquiringly: "One of the doctors?"
"Oh, you know what I mean," said Turnbull, impatiently.
"Themedical authorities of the place."
Evan was still staring back curiously at the beaming and beardedcreature behind him.
"The mad doctors," said Turnbull, shortly.
"Quite so," said MacIan.
After a rather restless silence Turnbull plucked MacIan by theelbow and pulled him aside.
"For goodness sake," he said, "don't offend this fellow; he maybe as mad as ten hatters, if you like, but he has us between hisfinger and thumb.
This is the very time he appointed to talk withus about our--well, our exeat."
"But what can it matter?"
asked the wondering MacIan.
"He can'tkeep us in the asylum.
We're not mad."
"Jackass!"
said Turnbull, heartily, "of course we're not mad.
Ofcourse, if we are medically examined and the thing is thrashedout, they will find we are not mad.
But don't you see that if thething is thrashed out it will mean letters to this reference andtelegrams to that; and at the first word of who we are, we shallbe taken out of a madhouse, where we may smoke, to a jail, wherewe mayn't.
No, if we manage this very quietly, he may merely letus out at the front door as stray revellers.
If there's half anhour of inquiry, we are cooked."
MacIan looked at the grass frowningly for a few seconds, and thensaid in a new, small and childish voice: "I am awfully stupid,Mr. Turnbull; you must be patient with me."
Turnbull caught Evan's elbow again with quite another gesture.
"Come," he cried, with the harsh voice of one who hides emotion,"come and let us be tactful in chorus."
The doctor with the pointed beard was already slanting it forwardat a more than usually acute angle, with the smile that expressedexpectancy.
"I hope I do not hurry you, gentlemen," he said, with thefaintest suggestion of a sneer at their hurried consultation,"but I believe you wanted to see me at half past eleven."
"I am most awfully sorry, Doctor," said Turnbull, with readyamiability; "I never meant to keep you waiting; but the sillyaccident that has landed us in your garden may have some ratherserious consequences to our friends elsewhere, and my friend herewas just drawing my attention to some of them."
"Quite so!
Quite so!"
said the doctor, hurriedly.
"If you reallywant to put anything before me, I can give you a few moments inmy consulting-room."
He led them rapidly into a small but imposing apartment, whichseemed to be built and furnished entirely in red-varnished wood.
There was one desk occupied with carefully docketed papers; andthere were several chairs of the red-varnished wood--though ofdifferent shape.
All along the wall ran something that might havebeen a bookcase, only that it was not filled with books, but withflat, oblong slabs or cases of the same polished dark-redconsistency.
What those flat wooden cases were they could form noconception.
The doctor sat down with a polite impatience on his professionalperch; MacIan remained standing, but Turnbull threw himselfalmost with luxury into a hard wooden arm-chair.
"This is a most absurd business, Doctor," he said, "and I amashamed to take up the time of busy professional men with suchpranks from outside.
The plain fact is, that he and I and a packof silly men and girls have organized a game across this part ofthe country--a sort of combination of hare and hounds and hideand seek--I dare say you've heard of it.
We are the hares, and,seeing your high wall look so inviting, we tumbled over it, andnaturally were a little startled with what we found on the otherside."
"Quite so!"
said the doctor, mildly.
"I can understand that youwere startled."
Turnbull had expected him to ask what place was the headquartersof the new exhilarating game, and who were the male and femaleenthusiasts who had brought it to such perfection; in fact,Turnbull was busy making up these personal and topographicalparticulars.
As the doctor did not ask the question, he grewslightly uneasy, and risked the question: "I hope you will acceptmy assurance that the thing was an accident and that no intrusionwas meant."
"Oh, yes, sir," replied the doctor, smiling, "I accept everythingthat you say."
"In that case," said Turnbull, rising genially, "we must notfurther interrupt your important duties.
I suppose there will besomeone to let us out?"
"No," said the doctor, still smiling steadily and pleasantly,"there will be no one to let you out."
"Can we let ourselves out, then?"
asked Turnbull, in somesurprise.
"Why, of course not," said the beaming scientist; "think howdangerous that would be in a place like this."
"Then, how the devil are we to get out?"
cried Turnbull, losinghis manners for the first time.
"It is a question of time, of receptivity, and treatment," saidthe doctor, arching his eyebrows indifferently.
"I do not regardeither of your cases as incurable."
And with that the man of the world was struck dumb, and, as inall intolerable moments, the word was with the unworldly.
MacIan took one stride to the table, leant across it, and said:"We can't stop here, we're not mad people!"
"We don't use the crude phrase," said the doctor, smiling at hispatent-leather boots.
"But you _can't_ think us mad," thundered MacIan.
"You never sawus before.
You know nothing about us.
You haven't even examinedus."
The doctor threw back his head and beard.
"Oh, yes," he said,"very thoroughly."
"But you can't shut a man up on your mere impressions withoutdocuments or certificates or anything?"
The doctor got languidly to his feet.
"Quite so," he said.
"Youcertainly ought to see the documents."
He went across to the curious mock book-shelves and took down oneof the flat mahogany cases.
This he opened with a curious key athis watch-chain, and laying back a flap revealed a quire offoolscap covered with close but quite clear writing.
The firstthree words were in such large copy-book hand that they caughtthe eye even at a distance.
They were: "MacIan, Evan Stuart."
Evan bent his angry eagle face over it; yet something blurred itand he could never swear he saw it distinctly.
He saw somethingthat began: "Prenatal influences predisposing to mania.
Grandfather believed in return of the Stuarts.
Mother carriedbone of St. Eulalia with which she touched children in sickness.
Marked religious mania at early age----"Evan fell back and fought for his speech.
"Oh!"
he burst out atlast.
"Oh!
if all this world I have walked in had been as sane asmy mother was."
Then he compressed his temples with his hands, as if to crushthem.
And then lifted suddenly a face that looked fresh andyoung, as if he had dipped and washed it in some holy well.
"Very well," he cried; "I will take the sour with the sweet.
Iwill pay the penalty of having enjoyed God in this monstrousmodern earth that cannot enjoy man or beast.
I will die happy inyour madhouse, only because I know what I know.
Let it begranted, then--MacIan is a mystic; MacIan is a maniac.
But thishonest shopkeeper and editor whom I have dragged on my inhumanescapades, you cannot keep him.
He will go free, thank God, he isnot down in any damned document.
His ancestor, I am certain, didnot die at Culloden.
His mother, I swear, had no relics.
Let myfriend out of your front door, and as for me----"The doctor had already gone across to the laden shelves, andafter a few minutes' short-sighted peering, had pulled downanother parallelogram of dark-red wood.
This also he unlocked on the table, and with the same unerringegotistic eye on of the company saw the words, written in largeletters: "Turnbull, James."
Hitherto Turnbull himself had somewhat scornfully surrendered hispart in the whole business; but he was too honest and unaffectednot to start at his own name.
After the name, the inscriptionappeared to run: "Unique case of Eleutheromania.
Parentage, as sooften in such cases, prosaic and healthy.
Eleutheromaniac signsoccurred early, however, leading him to attach himself to theindividualist Bradlaugh.
Recent outbreak of pure anarchy----"Turnbull slammed the case to, almost smashing it, and said with aburst of savage laughter: "Oh!
come along, MacIan; I don't careso much, even about getting out of the madhouse, if only we getout of this room.
You were right enough, MacIan, when you spokeabout--about mad doctors."
Somehow they found themselves outside in the cool, green garden,and then, after a stunned silence, Turnbull said: "There is onething that was puzzling me all the time, and I understand itnow."
"What do you mean?"
asked Evan.
"No man by will or wit," answered Turnbull, "can get out of thisgarden; and yet we got into it merely by jumping over a gardenwall.
The whole thing explains itself easily enough.
Thatundefended wall was an open trap.
It was a trap laid for twocelebrated lunatics.
They saw us get in right enough.
And theywill see that we do not get out."
Evan gazed at the garden wall, gravely for more than a minute,and then he nodded without a word.
XV.
THE DREAM OF MACIANThe system of espionage in the asylum was so effective andcomplete that in practice the patients could often enjoy a senseof almost complete solitude.
They could stray up so near to thewall in an apparently unwatched garden as to find it easy to jumpover it.
They would only have found the error of theircalculations if they had tried to jump.
Under this insulting liberty, in this artificial loneliness, EvanMacIan was in the habit of creeping out into the garden afterdark--especially upon moonlight nights.
The moon, indeed, was forhim always a positive magnet in a manner somewhat hard to explainto those of a robuster attitude.
Evidently, Apollo is to the fullas poetical as Diana; but it is not a question of poetry in thematured and intellectual sense of the word.
It is a question of acertain solid and childish fancy.
The sun is in the strict andliteral sense invisible; that is to say, that by our bodily eyesit cannot properly be seen.
But the moon is a much simpler thing;a naked and nursery sort of thing.
It hangs in the sky quitesolid and quite silver and quite useless; it is one hugecelestial snowball.
It was at least some such infantile facts andfancies which led Evan again and again during his dehumanizedimprisonment to go out as if to shoot the moon.
He was out in the garden on one such luminous and ghostly night,when the steady moonshine toned down all the colours of thegarden until almost the strongest tints to be seen were thestrong soft blue of the sky and the large lemon moon.
He waswalking with his face turned up to it in that rather half-wittedfashion which might have excused the error of his keepers; and ashe gazed he became aware of something little and lustrous flyingclose to the lustrous orb, like a bright chip knocked off themoon.
At first he thought it was a mere sparkle or refraction inhis own eyesight; he blinked and cleared his eyes.
Then hethought it was a falling star; only it did not fall.
It jerkedawkwardly up and down in a way unknown among meteors andstrangely reminiscent of the works of man.
The next moment thething drove right across the moon, and from being silver uponblue, suddenly became black upon silver; then although it passedthe field of light in a flash its outline was unmistakable thougheccentric.
It was a flying ship.
The vessel took one long and sweeping curve across the sky andcame nearer and nearer to MacIan, like a steam-engine cominground a bend.
It was of pure white steel, and in the moon itgleamed like the armour of Sir Galahad.
The simile of suchvirginity is not inappropriate; for, as it grew larger and largerand lower and lower, Evan saw that the only figure in it wasrobed in white from head to foot and crowned with snow-whitehair, on which the moonshine lay like a benediction.
The figurestood so still that he could easily have supposed it to be astatue.
Indeed, he thought it was until it spoke.
"Evan," said the voice, and it spoke with the simple authority ofsome forgotten father revisiting his children, "you have remainedhere long enough, and your sword is wanted elsewhere."
"Wanted for what?"
asked the young man, accepting the monstrousevent with a queer and clumsy naturalness; "what is my swordwanted for?"
"For all that you hold dear," said the man standing in themoonlight; "for the thrones of authority and for all ancientloyalty to law."
Evan looked up at the lunar orb again as if in irrationalappeal--a moon calf bleating to his mother the moon.
But the faceof Luna seemed as witless as his own; there is no help in natureagainst the supernatural; and he looked again at the tall marblefigure that might have been made out of solid moonlight.
Then he said in a loud voice: "Who are you?"
and the next momentwas seized by a sort of choking terror lest his question shouldbe answered.
But the unknown preserved an impenetrable silencefor a long space and then only answered: "I must not say who I amuntil the end of the world; but I may say what I am.
I am thelaw."
And he lifted his head so that the moon smote full upon hisbeautiful and ancient face.
The face was the face of a Greek god grown old, but not growneither weak or ugly; there was nothing to break its regularityexcept a rather long chin with a cleft in it, and this ratheradded distinction than lessened beauty.
His strong, well-openedeyes were very brilliant but quite colourless like steel.
MacIan was one of those to whom a reverence and self-submissionin ritual come quite easy, and are ordinary things.
It was notartificial in him to bend slightly to this solemn apparition orto lower his voice when he said: "Do you bring me some message?"
"I do bring you a message," answered the man of moon and marble.
"The king has returned."
Evan did not ask for or require any explanation.
"I suppose youcan take me to the war," he said, and the silent silver figureonly bowed its head again.
MacIan clambered into the silver boat,and it rose upward to the stars.
To say that it rose to the stars is no mere metaphor, for the skyhad cleared to that occasional and astonishing transparency inwhich one can see plainly both stars and moon.
As the white-robed figure went upward in his white chariot, hesaid quite quietly to Evan: "There is an answer to all the follytalked about equality.
Some stars are big and some small; somestand still and some circle around them as they stand.
They canbe orderly, but they cannot be equal."
"They are all very beautiful," said Evan, as if in doubt.
"They are all beautiful," answered the other, "because each is inhis place and owns his superior.
And now England will bebeautiful after the same fashion.
The earth will be as beautifulas the heavens, because our kings have come back to us."
"The Stuart----" began Evan, earnestly.
"Yes," answered the old man, "that which has returned is Stuartand yet older than Stuart.
It is Capet and Plantagenet andPendragon.
It is all that good old time of which proverbs tell,that golden reign of Saturn against which gods and men wererebels.
It is all that was ever lost by insolence and overwhelmedin rebellion.
It is your own forefather, MacIan with the brokensword, bleeding without hope at Culloden.
It is Charles refusingto answer the questions of the rebel court.
It is Mary of themagic face confronting the gloomy and grasping peers and theboorish moralities of Knox.
It is Richard, the last Plantagenet,giving his crown to Bolingbroke as to a common brigand.
It isArthur, overwhelmed in Lyonesse by heathen armies and dying inthe mist, doubtful if ever he shall return."
"But now----" said Evan, in a low voice.
"But now!"
said the old man; "he has returned."
"Is the war still raging?"
asked MacIan.
"It rages like the pit itself beyond the sea whither I am takingyou," answered the other.
"But in England the king enjoys his ownagain.
The people are once more taught and ruled as is best; theyare happy knights, happy squires, happy servants, happy serfs, ifyou will; but free at last of that load of vexation and lonelyvanity which was called being a citizen."
"Is England, indeed, so secure?"
asked Evan.
"Look out and see," said the guide.
"I fancy you have seen thisplace before."
They were driving through the air towards one region of the skywhere the hollow of night seemed darkest and which was quitewithout stars.
But against this black background there sprang up,picked out in glittering silver, a dome and a cross.
It seemedthat it was really newly covered with silver, which in the strongmoonlight was like white flame.
But, however, covered or painted,Evan had no difficult in knowing the place again.
He saw thegreat thoroughfare that sloped upward to the base of its hugepedestal of steps.
And he wondered whether the little shop wasstill by the side of it and whether its window had been mended.
As the flying ship swept round the dome he observed otheralterations.
The dome had been redecorated so as to give it amore solemn and somewhat more ecclesiastical note; the ball wasdraped or destroyed, and round the gallery, under the cross, ranwhat looked like a ring of silver statues, like the little leadenimages that stood round the hat of Louis XI.
Round the secondgallery, at the base of the dome, ran a second rank of suchimages, and Evan thought there was another round the steps below.
When they came closer he saw that they were figures in completearmour of steel or silver, each with a naked sword, point upward;and then he saw one of the swords move.
These were not statuesbut an armed order of chivalry thrown in three circles round thecross.
MacIan drew in his breath, as children do at anything theythink utterly beautiful.
For he could imagine nothing that soechoed his own visions of pontifical or chivalric art as thiswhite dome sitting like a vast silver tiara over London, ringedwith a triple crown of swords.
As they went sailing down Ludgate Hill, Evan saw that the stateof the streets fully answered his companion's claim about thereintroduction of order.
All the old blackcoated bustle with itscockney vivacity and vulgarity had disappeared.
Groups oflabourers, quietly but picturesquely clad, were passing up anddown in sufficiently large numbers; but it required but a fewmounted men to keep the streets in order.
The mounted men werenot common policemen, but knights with spurs and plume whosesmooth and splendid armour glittered like diamond rather thansteel.
Only in one place--at the corner of Bouverie Street--didthere appear to be a moment's confusion, and that was due tohurry rather than resistance.
But one old grumbling man did notget out of the way quick enough, and the man on horseback struckhim, not severely, across the shoulders with the flat of hissword.
"The soldier had no business to do that," said MacIan, sharply.
"The old man was moving as quickly as he could."
"We attach great importance to discipline in the streets," saidthe man in white, with a slight smile.
"Discipline is not so important as justice," said MacIan.
The other did not answer.
Then after a swift silence that took them out across St. James'sPark, he said: "The people must be taught to obey; they mustlearn their own ignorance.
And I am not sure," he continued,turning his back on Evan and looking out of the prow of the shipinto the darkness, "I am not sure that I agree with your littlemaxim about justice.
Discipline for the whole society is surelymore important than justice to an individual."
Evan, who was also leaning over the edge, swung round withstartling suddenness and stared at the other's back.
"Discipline for society----" he repeated, very staccato, "moreimportant--justice to individual?"
Then after a long silence he called out: "Who and what are you?"
"I am an angel," said the white-robed figure, without turninground.
"You are not a Catholic," said MacIan.
The other seemed to take no notice, but reverted to the maintopic.
"In our armies up in heaven we learn to put a wholesome fear intosubordinates."
MacIan sat craning his neck forward with an extraordinary andunaccountable eagerness.
"Go on!"
he cried, twisting and untwisting his long, bonyfingers, "go on!"
"Besides," continued he, in the prow, "you must allow for acertain high spirit and haughtiness in the superior type."
"Go on!"
said Evan, with burning eyes.
"Just as the sight of sin offends God," said the unknown, "sodoes the sight of ugliness offend Apollo.
The beautiful andprincely must, of necessity, be impatient with the squalidand----""Why, you great fool!"
cried MacIan, rising to the top of histremendous stature, "did you think I would have doubted only forthat rap with a sword?
I know that noble orders have bad knights,that good knights have bad tempers, that the Church has roughpriests and coarse cardinals; I have known it ever since I wasborn.
You fool!
you had only to say, 'Yes, it is rather a shame,'and I should have forgotten the affair.
But I saw on your mouththe twitch of your infernal sophistry; I knew that something waswrong with you and your cathedrals.
Something is wrong;everything is wrong.
You are not an angel.
That is not a church.
It is not the rightful king who has come home."
"That is unfortunate," said the other, in a quiet but hard voice,"because you are going to see his Majesty."
"No," said MacIan, "I am going to jump over the side."
"Do you desire death?"
"No," said Evan, quite composedly, "I desire a miracle."
"From whom do you ask it?
To whom do you appeal?"
said hiscompanion, sternly.
"You have betrayed the king, renounced hiscross on the cathedral, and insulted an archangel."
"I appeal to God," said Evan, and sprang up and stood upon theedge of the swaying ship.
The being in the prow turned slowly round; he looked at Evan witheyes which were like two suns, and put his hand to his mouth justtoo late to hide an awful smile.
"And how do you know," he said, "how do you know that I am notGod?"
MacIan screamed.
"Ah!"
he cried.
"Now I know who you really are.
You are not God.
You are not one of God's angels.
But you wereonce."
The being's hand dropped from his mouth and Evan dropped out ofthe car.
XVI.
THE DREAM OF TURNBULLTurnbull was walking rather rampantly up and down the garden on agusty evening chewing his cigar and in that mood when every mansuppresses an instinct to spit.
He was not, as a rule, a man muchacquainted with moods; and the storms and sunbursts of MacIan'ssoul passed before him as an impressive but unmeaning panorama,like the anarchy of Highland scenery.
Turnbull was one of thosemen in whom a continuous appetite and industry of the intellectleave the emotions very simple and steady.
His heart was in theright place; but he was quite content to leave it there.
It washis head that was his hobby.
His mornings and evenings weremarked not by impulses or thirsty desires, not by hope or byheart-break; they were filled with the fallacies he had detected,the problems he had made plain, the adverse theories he hadwrestled with and thrown, the grand generalizations he hadjustified.
But even the cheerful inner life of a logician may beupset by a lunatic asylum, to say nothing of whiffs of memoryfrom a lady in Jersey, and the little red-bearded man on thiswindy evening was in a dangerous frame of mind.
Plain and positive as he was, the influence of earth and sky mayhave been greater on him than he imagined; and the weather thatwalked the world at that moment was as red and angry as Turnbull.
Long strips and swirls of tattered and tawny cloud were draggeddownward to the west exactly as torn red raiment would bedragged.
And so strong and pitiless was the wind that it whippedaway fragments of red-flowering bushes or of copper beech, anddrove them also across the garden, a drift of red leaves, likethe leaves of autumn, as in parody of the red and driven rags ofcloud.
There was a sense in earth and heaven as of everything breakingup, and all the revolutionist in Turnbull rejoiced that it wasbreaking up.
The trees were breaking up under the wind, even inthe tall strength of their bloom: the clouds were breaking up andlosing even their large heraldic shapes.
Shards and shreds ofcopper cloud split off continually and floated by themselves, andfor some reason the truculent eye of Turnbull was attracted toone of these careering cloudlets, which seemed to him to careerin an exaggerated manner.
Also it kept its shape, which isunusual with clouds shaken off; also its shape was of an oddsort.
Turnbull continued to stare at it, and in a little time occurredthat crucial instant when a thing, however incredible, isaccepted as a fact.
The copper cloud was tumbling down towardsthe earth, like some gigantic leaf from the copper beeches.
Andas it came nearer it was evident, first, that it was not a cloud,and, second, that it was not itself of the colour of copper;only, being burnished like a mirror, it had reflected thered-brown colours of the burning clouds.
As the thing whirledlike a windswept leaf down towards the wall of the garden it wasclear that it was some sort of air-ship made of metal, andslapping the air with big broad fins of steel.
When it came abouta hundred feet above the garden, a shaggy, lean figure leapt upin it, almost black against the bronze and scarlet of the west,and, flinging out a kind of hook or anchor, caught on to thegreen apple-tree just under the wall; and from that fixed holdingground the ship swung in the red tempest like a captive balloon.
While our friend stood frozen for an instant by his astonishment,the queer figure in the airy car tipped the vehicle almost upsidedown by leaping over the side of it, seemed to slide or drop downthe rope like a monkey, and alighted (with impossible precisionand placidity) seated on the edge of the wall, over which hekicked and dangled his legs as he grinned at Turnbull.
The windroared in the trees yet more ruinous and desolate, the red tailsof the sunset were dragged downward like red dragons sucked downto death, and still on the top of the asylum wall sat thesinister figure with the grimace, swinging his feet in tune withthe tempest; while above him, at the end of its tossing ortightened cord, the enormous iron air-ship floated as light andas little noticed as a baby's balloon upon its string.
Turnbull's first movement after sixty motionless seconds was toturn round and look at the large, luxuriant parallelogram of thegarden and the long, low rectangular building beyond.
There wasnot a soul or a stir of life within sight.
And he had a quitemeaningless sensation, as if there never really had been any oneelse there except he since the foundation of the world.
Stiffening in himself the masculine but mirthless courage of theatheist, he drew a little nearer to the wall and, catching theman at a slightly different angle of the evening light, could seehis face and figure quite plain.
Two facts about him stood out inthe picked colours of some piratical schoolboy's story.
The firstwas that his lean brown body was bare to the belt of his loosewhite trousers; the other that through hygiene, affectation, orwhatever other cause, he had a scarlet handkerchief tied tightlybut somewhat aslant across his brow.
After these two facts hadbecome emphatic, others appeared sufficiently important.
One wasthat under the scarlet rag the hair was plentiful, but white aswith the last snows of mortality.
Another was that under the mopof white and senile hair the face was strong, handsome, andsmiling, with a well-cut profile and a long cloven chin.
Thelength of this lower part of the face and the strange cleft in it(which gave the man, in quite another sense from the common one,a double chin) faintly spoilt the claim of the face to absoluteregularity, but it greatly assisted it in wearing the expressionof half-smiling and half-sneering arrogance with which it wasstaring at all the stones, all the flowers, but especially at thesolitary man.
"What do you want?"
shouted Turnbull.
"I want you, Jimmy," said the eccentric man on the wall, and withthe very word he had let himself down with a leap on to thecentre of the lawn, where he bounded once literally like anIndia-rubber ball and then stood grinning with his legs astride.
The only three facts that Turnbull could now add to his inventorywere that the man had an ugly-looking knife swinging at histrousers belt, that his brown feet were as bare as his bronzedtrunk and arms, and that his eyes had a singular bleak brilliancywhich was of no particular colour.
"Excuse my not being in evening dress," said the newcomer with anurbane smile.
"We scientific men, you know--I have to work my ownengines--electrical engineer--very hot work."
"Look here," said Turnbull, sturdily clenching his fists in histrousers pockets, "I am bound to expect lunatics inside thesefour walls; but I do bar their coming from outside, bang out ofthe sunset clouds."
"And yet you came from the outside, too, Jim," said the strangerin a voice almost affectionate.
"What do you want?"
asked Turnbull, with an explosion of temperas sudden as a pistol shot.
"I have already told you," said the man, lowering his voice andspeaking with evident sincerity; "I want you."
"What do you want with me?"
"I want exactly what you want," said the new-comer with a newgravity.
"I want the Revolution."
Turnbull looked at the fire-swept sky and the wind-strickenwoodlands, and kept on repeating the word voicelessly tohimself--the word that did indeed so thoroughly express his moodof rage as it had been among those red clouds and rockingtree-tops.
"Revolution!"
he said to himself.
"TheRevolution--yes, that is what I want right enough--anything, solong as it is a Revolution."
To some cause he could never explain he found himself completingthe sentence on the top of the wall, having automaticallyfollowed the stranger so far.
But when the stranger silentlyindicated the rope that led to the machine, he found himselfpausing and saying: "I can't leave MacIan behind in this den."
"We are going to destroy the Pope and all the kings," said thenew-comer.
"Would it be wiser to take him with us?"
Somehow the muttering Turnbull found himself in the flying shipalso, and it swung up into the sunset.
"All the great rebels have been very little rebels," said the manwith the red scarf.
"They have been like fourth-form boys whosometimes venture to hit a fifth-form boy.
That was all the worthof their French Revolution and regicide.
The boys never reallydared to defy the schoolmaster."
"Whom do you mean by the schoolmaster?"
asked Turnbull.
"You know whom I mean," answered the strange man, as he lay backon cushions and looked up into the angry sky.
They seemed rising into stronger and stronger sunlight, as if itwere sunrise rather than sunset.
But when they looked down at theearth they saw it growing darker and darker.
The lunatic asylumin its large rectangular grounds spread below them in aforeshortened and infantile plan, and looked for the first timethe grotesque thing that it was.
But the clear colours of theplan were growing darker every moment.
The masses of rose orrhododendron deepened from crimson to violet.
The maze of gravelpathways faded from gold to brown.
By the time they had risen afew hundred feet higher nothing could be seen of that darkeninglandscape except the lines of lighted windows, each one of which,at least, was the light of one lost intelligence.
But on them asthey swept upward better and braver winds seemed to blow, and onthem the ruby light of evening seemed struck, and splashed likered spurts from the grapes of Dionysus.
Below them the fallenlights were literally the fallen stars of servitude.
And abovethem all the red and raging clouds were like the leaping flags ofliberty.
The man with the cloven chin seemed to have a singular power ofunderstanding thoughts; for, as Turnbull felt the whole universetilt and turn over his head, the stranger said exactly the rightthing.
"Doesn't it seem as if everything were being upset?"
said he;"and if once everything is upset, He will be upset on top of it."
Then, as Turnbull made no answer, his host continued:"That is the really fine thing about space.
It is topsy-turvy.
You have only to climb far enough towards the morning star tofeel that you are coming down to it.
You have only to dive deepenough into the abyss to feel that you are rising.
That is theonly glory of this universe--it is a giddy universe."
Then, as Turnbull was still silent, he added:"The heavens are full of revolution--of the real sort ofrevolution.
All the high things are sinking low and all the bigthings looking small.
All the people who think they are aspiringfind they are falling head foremost.
And all the people who thinkthey are condescending find they are climbing up a precipice.
That is the intoxication of space.
That is the only joy ofeternity--doubt.
There is only one pleasure the angels canpossibly have in flying, and that is, that they do not knowwhether they are on their head or their heels."
Then, finding his companion still mute, he fell himself into asmiling and motionless meditation, at the end of which he saidsuddenly:"So MacIan converted you?"
Turnbull sprang up as if spurning the steel car from under hisfeet.
"Converted me!"
he cried.
"What the devil do you mean?
Ihave known him for a month, and I have not retracted asingle----""This Catholicism is a curious thing," said the man of the clovenchin in uninterrupted reflectiveness, leaning his elegant elbowsover the edge of the vessel; "it soaks and weakens men withouttheir knowing it, just as I fear it has soaked and weakened you."
Turnbull stood in an attitude which might well have meantpitching the other man out of the flying ship.
"I am an atheist," he said, in a stifled voice.
"I have alwaysbeen an atheist.
I am still an atheist."
Then, addressing theother's indolent and indifferent back, he cried: "In God's namewhat do you mean?"
And the other answered without turning round:"I mean nothing in God's name."
Turnbull spat over the edge of the car and fell back furiouslyinto his seat.
The other continued still unruffled, and staring over the edgeidly as an angler stares down at a stream.
"The truth is that we never thought that you could have beencaught," he said; "we counted on you as the one red-hotrevolutionary left in the world.
But, of course, these men likeMacIan are awfully clever, especially when they pretend to bestupid."
Turnbull leapt up again in a living fury and cried: "What have Igot to do with MacIan?
I believe all I ever believed, anddisbelieve all I ever disbelieved.
What does all this mean, andwhat do you want with me here?"
Then for the first time the other lifted himself from the edge ofthe car and faced him.
"I have brought you here," he answered, "to take part in the lastwar of the world."
"The last war!"
repeated Turnbull, even in his dazed state alittle touchy about such a dogma; "how do you know it will be thelast?"
The man laid himself back in his reposeful attitude, and said:"It is the last war, because if it does not cure the world forever, it will destroy it."
"What do you mean?"
"I only mean what you mean," answered the unknown in a temperatevoice.
"What was it that you always meant on those million andone nights when you walked outside your Ludgate Hill shop andshook your hand in the air?"
"Still I do not see," said Turnbull, stubbornly.
"You will soon," said the other, and abruptly bent downward oneiron handle of his huge machine.
The engine stopped, stooped, anddived almost as deliberately as a man bathing; in their downwardrush they swept within fifty yards of a big bulk of stone thatTurnbull knew only too well.
The last red anger of the sunset wasended; the dome of heaven was dark; the lanes of flaring light inthe streets below hardly lit up the base of the building.
But hesaw that it was St. Paul's Cathedral, and he saw that on the topof it the ball was still standing erect, but the cross wasstricken and had fallen sideways.
Then only he cared to look downinto the streets, and saw that they were inflamed with uproar andtossing passions.
"We arrive at a happy moment," said the man steering the ship.
"The insurgents are bombarding the city, and a cannon-ball hasjust hit the cross.
Many of the insurgents are simple people, andthey naturally regard it as a happy omen."
"Quite so," said Turnbull, in a rather colourless voice.
"Yes," replied the other.
"I thought you would be glad to seeyour prayer answered.
Of course I apologize for the word prayer."
"Don't mention it," said Turnbull.
The flying ship had come down upon a sort of curve, and was nowrising again.
The higher and higher it rose the broader andbroader became the scenes of flame and desolation underneath.
Ludgate Hill indeed had been an uncaptured and comparativelyquiet height, altered only by the startling coincidence of thecross fallen awry.
All the other thoroughfares on all sides ofthat hill were full of the pulsation and the pain of battle, fullof shaking torches and shouting faces.
When at length they hadrisen high enough to have a bird's-eye view of the wholecampaign, Turnbull was already intoxicated.
He had smeltgunpowder, which was the incense of his own revolutionaryreligion.
"Have the people really risen?"
he asked, breathlessly.
"What arethey fighting about?"
"The programme is rather elaborate," said his entertainer withsome indifference.
"I think Dr. Hertz drew it up."
Turnbull wrinkled his forehead.
"Are all the poor people with theRevolution?"
he asked.
The other shrugged his shoulders.
"All the instructed andclass-conscious part of them without exception," he replied.
"There were certainly a few districts; in fact, we are passingover them just now----"Turnbull looked down and saw that the polished car was literallylit up from underneath by the far-flung fires from below.
Underneath whole squares and solid districts were in flames, likeprairies or forests on fire.
"Dr. Hertz has convinced everybody," said Turnbull's cicerone ina smooth voice, "that nothing can really be done with the realslums.
His celebrated maxim has been quite adopted.
I mean thethree celebrated sentences: 'No man should be unemployed.
Employthe employables.
Destroy the unemployables.'"
There was a silence, and then Turnbull said in a rather strainedvoice: "And do I understand that this good work is going on underhere?"
"Going on splendidly," replied his companion in the heartiestvoice.
"You see, these people were much too tired and weak evento join the social war.
They were a definite hindrance to it."
"And so you are simply burning them out?"
"It _does_ seem absurdly simple," said the man, with a beamingsmile, "when one thinks of all the worry and talk about helping ahopeless slave population, when the future obviously was onlycrying to be rid of them.
There are happy babes unborn ready toburst the doors when these drivellers are swept away."
"Will you permit me to say," said Turnbull, after reflection,"that I don't like all this?"
"And will you permit me to say," said the other, with a snap,"that I don't like Mr. Evan MacIan?"
Somewhat to the speaker's surprise this did not inflame thesensitive sceptic; he had the air of thinking thoroughly, andthen he said: "No, I don't think it's my friend MacIan thattaught me that.
I think I should always have said that I don'tlike this.
These people have rights."
"Rights!"
repeated the unknown in a tone quite indescribable.
Then he added with a more open sneer: "Perhaps they also havesouls."
"They have lives!"
said Turnbull, sternly; "that is quite enoughfor me.
I understood you to say that you thought life sacred."
"Yes, indeed!"
cried his mentor with a sort of idealisticanimation.
"Yes, indeed!
Life is sacred--but lives are notsacred.
We are improving Life by removing lives.
Can you, as afree-thinker, find any fault in that?"
"Yes," said Turnbull with brevity.
"Yet you applaud tyrannicide," said the stranger withrationalistic gaiety.
"How inconsistent!
It really comes tothis: You approve of taking away life from those to whom it is atriumph and a pleasure.
But you will not take away life fromthose to whom it is a burden and a toil."
Turnbull rose to his feet in the car with considerabledeliberation, but his face seemed oddly pale.
The other went onwith enthusiasm.
"Life, yes, Life is indeed sacred!"
he cried; "but new lives forold!
Good lives for bad!
On that very place where now theresprawls one drunken wastrel of a pavement artist more or lesswishing he were dead--on that very spot there shall in the futurebe living pictures; there shall be golden girls and boys leapingin the sun."
Turnbull, still standing up, opened his lips.
"Will you put medown, please?"
he said, quite calmly, like on stopping anomnibus.
"Put you down--what do you mean?"
cried his leader.
"I am takingyou to the front of the revolutionary war, where you will be oneof the first of the revolutionary leaders."
"Thank you," replied Turnbull with the same painful constraint.
"I have heard about your revolutionary war, and I think on thewhole that I would rather be anywhere else."
"Do you want to be taken to a monastery," snarled the other,"with MacIan and his winking Madonnas."
"I want to be taken to a madhouse," said Turnbull distinctly,giving the direction with a sort of precision.
"I want to go backto exactly the same lunatic asylum from which I came."
"Why?"
asked the unknown.
"Because I want a little sane and wholesome society," answeredTurnbull.
There was a long and peculiar silence, and then the man drivingthe flying machine said quite coolly: "I won't take you back."
And then Turnbull said equally coolly: "Then I'll jump out of thecar."
The unknown rose to his full height, and the expression in hiseyes seemed to be made of ironies behind ironies, as two mirrorsinfinitely reflect each other.
At last he said, very gravely: "Doyou think I am the devil?"
"Yes," said Turnbull, violently.
"For I think the devil is adream, and so are you.
I don't believe in you or your flying shipor your last fight of the world.
It is all a nightmare.
I say asa fact of dogma and faith that it is all a nightmare.
And I willbe a martyr for my faith as much as St. Catherine, for I willjump out of this ship and risk waking up safe in bed."
After swaying twice with the swaying vessel he dived over theside as one dives into the sea.
For some incredible moments starsand space and planets seemed to shoot up past him as the sparksfly upward; and yet in that sickening descent he was full of someunnatural happiness.
He could connect it with no idea except onethat half escaped him--what Evan had said of the differencebetween Christ and Satan; that it was by Christ's own choice thatHe descended into hell.
When he again realized anything, he was lying on his elbow on thelawn of the lunatic asylum, and the last red of the sunset hadnot yet disappeared.
XVII.
THE IDIOTEvan MacIan was standing a few yards off looking at him inabsolute silence.
He had not the moral courage to ask MacIan if there had beenanything astounding in the manner of his coming there, nor didMacIan seem to have any question to ask, or perhaps any need toask it.
The two men came slowly towards each other, and found thesame expression on each other's faces.
Then, for the first timein all their acquaintance, they shook hands.
Almost as if this were a kind of unconscious signal, it broughtDr. Quayle bounding out of a door and running across the lawn.
"Oh, there you are!"
he exclaimed with a relieved giggle.
"Willyou come inside, please?
I want to speak to you both."
They followed him into his shiny wooden office where theirdamning record was kept.
Dr. Quayle sat down on a swivel chairand swung round to face them.
His carved smile had suddenlydisappeared.
"I will be plain with you gentlemen," he said, abruptly; "youknow quite well we do our best for everybody here.
Your caseshave been under special consideration, and the Master himself hasdecided that you ought to be treated specially and--er--undersomewhat simpler conditions."
"You mean treated worse, I suppose," said Turnbull, gruffly.
The doctor did not reply, and MacIan said: "I expected this."
Hiseyes had begun to glow.
The doctor answered, looking at his desk and playing with a key:"Well, in certain cases that give anxiety--it is oftenbetter----""Give anxiety," said Turnbull, fiercely.
"Confound yourimpudence!
What do you mean?
You imprison two perfectly sane menin a madhouse because you have made up a long word.
They take itin good temper, walk and talk in your garden like monks who havefound a vocation, are civil even to you, you damned druggists'hack!
Behave not only more sanely than any of your patients, butmore sanely than half the sane men outside, and you have thesoul-stifling cheek to say that they give anxiety."
"The head of the asylum has settled it all," said Dr. Quayle,still looking down.
MacIan took one of his immense strides forward and stood over thedoctor with flaming eyes.
"If the head has settled it let the head announce it," he said.
"I won't take it from you.
I believe you to be a low, gibberingdegenerate.
Let us see the head of the asylum."
"See the head of the asylum," repeated Dr. Quayle.
"Certainlynot."
The tall Highlander, bending over him, put one hand on hisshoulder with fatherly interest.
"You don't seem to appreciate the peculiar advantages of myposition as a lunatic," he said.
"I could kill you with my lefthand before such a rat as you could so much as squeak.
And Iwouldn't be hanged for it."
"I certainly agree with Mr. MacIan," said Turnbull with sobrietyand perfect respectfulness, "that you had better let us see thehead of the institution."
Dr. Quayle got to his feet in a mixture of sudden hysteria andclumsy presence of mind.
"Oh, certainly," he said with a weak laugh.
"You can see the headof the asylum if you particularly want to."
He almost ran out ofthe room, and the two followed swiftly on his flying coat tails.
He knocked at an ordinary varnished door in the corridor.
When avoice said, "Come in," MacIan's breath went hissing back throughhis teeth into his chest.
Turnbull was more impetuous, and openedthe door.
It was a neat and well-appointed room entirely lined with amedical library.
At the other end of it was a ponderous andpolished desk with an incandescent lamp on it, the light of whichwas just sufficient to show a slender, well-bred figure in anordinary medical black frock-coat, whose head, quite silveredwith age, was bent over neat piles of notes.
This gentlemanlooked up for an instant as they entered, and the lamplight fellon his glittering spectacles and long, clean-shaven face--a facewhich would have been simply like an aristocrat's but that acertain lion poise of the head and long cleft in the chin made itlook more like a very handsome actor's.
It was only for a flashthat his face was thus lifted.
Then he bent his silver head overhis notes once more, and said, without looking up again:"I told you, Dr. Quayle, that these men were to go to cells B andC."Turnbull and MacIan looked at each other, and said more than theycould ever say with tongues or swords.
Among other things theysaid that to that particular Head of the institution it was awaste of time to appeal, and they followed Dr. Quayle out of theroom.
The instant they stepped out into the corridor four sturdyfigures stepped from four sides, pinioned them, and ran themalong the galleries.
They might very likely have thrown theircaptors right and left had they been inclined to resist, but forsome nameless reason they were more inclined to laugh.
A mixtureof mad irony with childish curiosity made them feel quiteinclined to see what next twist would be taken by their imbecileluck.
They were dragged down countless cold avenues lined withglazed tiles, different only in being of different lengths andset at different angles.
They were so many and so monotonous thatto escape back by them would have been far harder than fleeingfrom the Hampton Court maze.
Only the fact that windows grewfewer, coming at longer intervals, and the fact that when thewindows did come they seemed shadowed and let in less light,showed that they were winding into the core or belly of someenormous building.
After a little time the glazed corridors beganto be lit by electricity.
At last, when they had walked nearly a mile in those white andpolished tunnels, they came with quite a shock to the futilefinality of a cul-de-sac.
All that white and weary journey endedsuddenly in an oblong space and a blank white wall.
But in thewhite wall there were two iron doors painted white on which werewritten, respectively, in neat black capitals B and C."You go in here, sir," said the leader of the officials, quiterespectfully, "and you in here."
But before the doors had clanged upon their dazed victims, MacIanhad been able to say to Turnbull with a strange drawl ofsignificance: "I wonder who A is."
Turnbull made an automatic struggle before he allowed himself tobe thrown into the cell.
Hence it happened that he was the lastto enter, and was still full of the exhilaration of theadventures for at least five minutes after the echo of theclanging door had died away.
Then, when silence had sunk deep and nothing happened for two anda half hours, it suddenly occurred to him that this was the endof his life.
He was hidden and sealed up in this little crack ofstone until the flesh should fall off his bones.
He was dead, andthe world had won.
His cell was of an oblong shape, but very long in comparison withits width.
It was just wide enough to permit the arms to be fullyextended with the dumb-bells, which were hung up on the leftwall, very dusty.
It was, however, long enough for a man to walkone thirty-fifth part of a mile if he traversed it entirely.
Onthe same principle a row of fixed holes, quite close together,let in to the cells by pipes what was alleged to be the freshestair.
For these great scientific organizers insisted that a manshould be healthy even if he was miserable.
They provided a walklong enough to give him exercise and holes large enough to givehim oxygen.
There their interest in human nature suddenly ceased.
It seemed never to have occurred to them that the benefit ofexercise belongs partly to the benefit of liberty.
They had notentertained the suggestion that the open air is only one of theadvantages of the open sky.
They administered air in secret, butin sufficient doses, as if it were a medicine.
They suggestedwalking, as if no man had ever felt inclined to walk.
Above all,the asylum authorities insisted on their own extraordinarycleanliness.
Every morning, while Turnbull was still half asleepon his iron bedstead which was lifted half-way up the wall andclamped to it with iron, four sluices or metal mouths openedabove him at the four corners of the chamber and washed it whiteof any defilement.
Turnbull's solitary soul surged up againstthis sickening daily solemnity.
"I am buried alive!"
he cried, bitterly; "they have hidden meunder mountains.
I shall be here till I rot.
Why the blazesshould it matter to them whether I am dirty or clean."
Every morning and evening an iron hatchway opened in his oblongcell, and a brown hairy hand or two thrust in a plate ofperfectly cooked lentils and a big bowl of cocoa.
He was notunderfed any more than he was underexercised or asphyxiated.
Hehad ample walking space, ample air, ample and even filling food.
The only objection was that he had nothing to walk towards,nothing to feast about, and no reason whatever for drawing thebreath of life.
Even the shape of his cell especially irritated him.
It was along, narrow parallelogram, which had a flat wall at one end andought to have had a flat wall at the other; but that end wasbroken by a wedge or angle of space, like the prow of a ship.
After three days of silence and cocoa, this angle at the endbegan to infuriate Turnbull.
It maddened him to think that twolines came together and pointed at nothing.
After the fifth dayhe was reckless, and poked his head into the corner.
Aftertwenty-five days he almost broke his head against it.
Then hebecame quite cool and stupid again, and began to examine it likea sort of Robinson Crusoe.
Almost unconsciously it was his instinct to examine outlets, andhe found himself paying particular attention to the row of holeswhich let in the air into his last house of life.
He soondiscovered that these air-holes were all the ends and mouths oflong leaden tubes which doubtless carried air from some remotewatering-place near Margate.
One evening while he was engaged inthe fifth investigation he noticed something like twilight in oneof these dumb mouths, as compared with the darkness of theothers.
Thrusting his finger in as far as it would go, he found ahole and flapping edge in the tube.
This he rent open andinstantly saw a light behind; it was at least certain that he hadstruck some other cell.
It is a characteristic of all things now called "efficient",which means mechanical and calculated, that if they go wrong atall they go entirely wrong.
There is no power of retrieving adefeat, as in simpler and more living organisms.
A strong gun canconquer a strong elephant, but a wounded elephant can easilyconquer a broken gun.
Thus the Prussian monarchy in theeighteenth century, or now, can make a strong army merely bymaking the men afraid.
But it does it with the permanentpossibility that the men may some day be more afraid of theirenemies than of their officers.
Thus the drainage in our citiesso long as it is quite solid means a general safety, but if thereis one leak it means concentrated poison--an explosion of deathlygerms like dynamite, a spirit of stink.
Thus, indeed, all thatexcellent machinery which is the swiftest thing on earth insaving human labour is also the slowest thing on earth inresisting human interference.
It may be easier to get chocolatefor nothing out of a shopkeeper than out of an automatic machine.
But if you did manage to steal the chocolate, the automaticmachine would be much less likely to run after you.
Turnbull was not long in discovering this truth in connexion withthe cold and colossal machinery of this great asylum.
He had beenshaken by many spiritual states since the instant when he waspitched head foremost into that private cell which was to be hisprivate room till death.
He had felt a high fit of pride andpoetry, which had ebbed away and left him deadly cold.
He hadknown a period of mere scientific curiosity, in the course ofwhich he examined all the tiles of his cell, with the gratifyingconclusion that they were all the same shape and size; but wasgreatly puzzled about the angle in the wall at the end, and alsoabout an iron peg or spike that stood out from the wall, theobject of which he does not know to this day.
Then he had aperiod of mere madness not to be written of by decent men, butonly by those few dirty novelists hallooed on by the infernalhuntsman to hunt down and humiliate human nature.
This alsopassed, but left behind it a feverish distaste for many of themere objects around him.
Long after he had returned to sanity andsuch hopeless cheerfulness as a man might have on a desertisland, he disliked the regular squares of the pattern of walland floor and the triangle that terminated his corridor.
Aboveall, he had a hatred, deep as the hell he did not believe in, forthe objectless iron peg in the wall.
But in all his moods, sane or insane, intolerant or stoical, henever really doubted this: that the machine held him as light andas hopelessly as he had from his birth been held by the hopelesscosmos of his own creed.
He knew well the ruthless andinexhaustible resources of our scientific civilization.
He nomore expected rescue from a medical certificate than rescue fromthe solar system.
In many of his Robinson Crusoe moods he thoughtkindly of MacIan as of some quarrelsome school-fellow who hadlong been dead.
He thought of leaving in the cell when he died arigid record of his opinions, and when he began to write themdown on scraps of envelope in his pocket, he was startled todiscover how much they had changed.
Then he remembered theBeauchamp Tower, and tried to write his blazing scepticism on thewall, and discovered that it was all shiny tiles on which nothingcould be either drawn or carved.
Then for an instant there hungand broke above him like a high wave the whole horror ofscientific imprisonment, which manages to deny a man not onlyliberty, but every accidental comfort of bondage.
In the oldfilthy dungeons men could carve their prayers or protests in therock.
Here the white and slippery walls escaped even from bearingwitness.
The old prisoners could make a pet of a mouse or abeetle strayed out of a hole.
Here the unpierceable walls werewashed every morning by an automatic sluice.
There was no naturalcorruption and no merciful decay by which a living thing couldenter in.
Then James Turnbull looked up and saw the highinvincible hatefulness of the society in which he lived, and sawthe hatefulness of something else also, which he told himselfagain and again was not the cosmos in which he believed.
But allthe time he had never once doubted that the five sides of hiscell were for him the wall of the world henceforward, and it gavehim a shock of surprise even to discover the faint light throughthe aperture in the ventilation tube.
But he had forgotten howclose efficiency has to pack everything together and how easily,therefore, a pipe here or there may leak.
Turnbull thrust his first finger down the aperture, and at lastmanaged to make a slight further fissure in the piping.
The lightthat came up from beyond was very faint, and apparently indirect;it seemed to fall from some hole or window higher up.
As he wasscrewing his eye to peer at this grey and greasy twilight he wasastonished to see another human finger very long and lean comedown from above towards the broken pipe and hook it up tosomething higher.
The lighted aperture was abruptly blackened andblocked, presumably by a face and mouth, for something humanspoke down the tube, though the words were not clear.
"Who is that?"
asked Turnbull, trembling with excitement, yetwary and quite resolved not to spoil any chance.
After a few indistinct sounds the voice came down with a strongArgyllshire accent:"I say, Turnbull, we couldn't fight through this tube, could we?"
Sentiments beyond speech surged up in Turnbull and silenced himfor a space just long enough to be painful.
Then he said with hisold gaiety: "I vote we talk a little first; I don't want tomurder the first man I have met for ten million years."
"I know what you mean," answered the other.
"It has been awful.
For a mortal month I have been alone with God."
Turnbull started, and it was on the tip of his tongue to answer:"Alone with God!
Then you do not know what loneliness is."
But he answered, after all, in his old defiant style: "Alone withGod, were you?
And I suppose you found his Majesty's societyrather monotonous?"
"Oh, no," said MacIan, and his voice shuddered; "it was a greatdeal too exciting."
After a very long silence the voice of MacIan said: "What do youreally hate most in your place?"
"You'd think I was really mad if I told you," answered Turnbull,bitterly.
"Then I expect it's the same as mine," said the other voice.
"I am sure it's not the same as anybody's," said Turnbull, "forit has no rhyme or reason.
Perhaps my brain really has gone, butI detest that iron spike in the left wall more than the damneddesolation or the damned cocoa.
Have you got one in your cell?"
"Not now," replied MacIan with serenity.
"I've pulled it out."
His fellow-prisoner could only repeat the words.
"I pulled it out the other day when I was off my head," continuedthe tranquil Highland voice.
"It looked so unnecessary."
"You must be ghastly strong," said Turnbull.
"One is, when one is mad," was the careless reply, "and it hadworn a little loose in the socket.
Even now I've got it out Ican't discover what it was for.
But I've found out something along sight funnier."
"What do you mean?"
asked Turnbull.
"I have found out where A is," said the other.
Three weeks afterwards MacIan had managed to open upcommunications which made his meaning plain.
By that time the twocaptives had fully discovered and demonstrated that weakness inthe very nature of modern machinery to which we have alreadyreferred.
The very fact that they were isolated from allcompanions meant that they were free from all spies, and as therewere no gaolers to be bribed, so there were none to be baffled.
Machinery brought them their cocoa and cleaned their cells; thatmachinery was as helpless as it was pitiless.
A little patientviolence, conducted day after day amid constant mutualsuggestion, opened an irregular hole in the wall, large enough tolet in a small man, in the exact place where there had beenbefore the tiny ventilation holes.
Turnbull tumbled somehow intoMacIan's apartment, and his first glance found out that the ironspike was indeed plucked from its socket, and left, moreover,another ragged hole into some hollow place behind.
But for thisMacIan's cell was the duplicate of Turnbull's--a long oblongending in a wedge and lined with cold and lustrous tiles.
Thesmall hole from which the peg had been displaced was in thatshort oblique wall at the end nearest to Turnbull's.
Thatindividual looked at it with a puzzled face.
"What is in there?"
he asked.
MacIan answered briefly: "Another cell."
"But where can the door of it be?"
said his companion, even morepuzzled; "the doors of our cells are at the other end."
"It has no door," said Evan.
In the pause of perplexity that followed, an eerie and sinisterfeeling crept over Turnbull's stubborn soul in spite of himself.
The notion of the doorless room chilled him with that sense ofhalf-witted curiosity which one has when something horrible ishalf understood.
"James Turnbull," said MacIan, in a low and shaken voice, "thesepeople hate us more than Nero hated Christians, and fear us morethan any man feared Nero.
They have filled England with frenzyand galloping in order to capture us and wipe us out--in order tokill us.
And they have killed us, for you and I have only made ahole in our coffins.
But though this hatred that they felt for usis bigger than they felt for Bonaparte, and more plain andpractical than they would feel for Jack the Ripper, yet it is notwe whom the people of this place hate most."
A cold and quivering impatience continued to crawl up Turnbull'sspine; he had never felt so near to superstition andsupernaturalism, and it was not a pretty sort of superstitioneither.
"There is another man more fearful and hateful," went on MacIan,in his low monotone voice, "and they have buried him even deeper.
God knows how they did it, for he was let in by neither door norwindow, nor lowered through any opening above.
I expect theseiron handles that we both hate have been part of some damnedmachinery for walling him up.
He is there.
I have looked throughthe hole at him; but I cannot stand looking at him long, becausehis face is turned away from me and he does not move."
Al Turnbull's unnatural and uncompleted feelings found theiroutlet in rushing to the aperture and looking into the unknownroom.
It was a third oblong cell exactly like the other two except thatit was doorless, and except that on one of the walls was painteda large black A like the B and C outside their own doors.
Theletter in this case was not painted outside, because this prisonhad no outside.
On the same kind of tiled floor, of which the monotonous squareshad maddened Turnbull's eye and brain, was sitting a figure whichwas startlingly short even for a child, only that the enormoushead was ringed with hair of a frosty grey.
The figure wasdraped, both insecurely and insufficiently, in what looked likethe remains of a brown flannel dressing-gown; an emptied cup ofcocoa stood on the floor beside it, and the creature had his biggrey head cocked at a particular angle of inquiry or attentionwhich amid all that gathering gloom and mystery struck one ascomic if not cocksure.
After six still seconds Turnbull could stand it no longer, butcalled out to the dwarfish thing--in what words heaven knows.
Thething got up with the promptitude of an animal, and turning roundoffered the spectacle of two owlish eyes and a hugegrey-and-white beard not unlike the plumage of an owl.
Thisextraordinary beard covered him literally to his feet (not thatthat was very far), and perhaps it was as well that it did, forportions of his remaining clothing seemed to fall off whenever hemoved.
One talks trivially of a face like parchment, but this oldman's face was so wrinkled that it was like a parchment loadedwith hieroglyphics.
The lines of his face were so deep andcomplex that one could see five or ten different faces besidesthe real one, as one can see them in an elaborate wall-paper.
Andyet while his face seemed like a scripture older than the gods,his eyes were quite bright, blue, and startled like those of ababy.
They looked as if they had only an instant before beenfitted into his head.
Everything depended so obviously upon whether this buried monsterspoke that Turnbull did not know or care whether he himself hadspoken.
He said something or nothing.
And then he waited for thisdwarfish voice that had been hidden under the mountains of theworld.
At last it did speak, and spoke in English, with a foreignaccent that was neither Latin nor Teutonic.
He suddenly stretchedout a long and very dirty forefinger, and cried in a voice ofclear recognition, like a child's: "That's a hole."
He digested the discovery for some seconds, sucking his finger,and then he cried, with a crow of laughter: "And that's a headcome through it."
The hilarious energy in this idiot attitude gave Turnbull anothersick turn.
He had grown to tolerate those dreary and mumblingmadmen who trailed themselves about the beautiful asylum gardens.
But there was something new and subversive of the universe in thecombination of so much cheerful decision with a body without abrain.
"Why did they put you in such a place?"
he asked at last withembarrassment.
"Good place.
Yes," said the old man, nodding a great many timesand beaming like a flattered landlord.
"Good shape.
Long andnarrow, with a point.
Like this," and he made lovingly with hishands a map of the room in the air.
"But that's not the best," he added, confidentially.
"Squaresvery good; I have a nice long holiday, and can count them.
Butthat's not the best."
"What is the best?"
asked Turnbull in great distress.
"Spike is the best," said the old man, opening his blue eyesblazing; "it sticks out."
The words Turnbull spoke broke out of him in pure pity.
"Can't wedo anything for you?"
he said.
"I am very happy," said the other, alphabetically.
"You are agood man.
Can I help you?"
"No, I don't think you can, sir," said Turnbull with roughpathos; "I am glad you are contented at least."
The weird old person opened his broad blue eyes and fixedTurnbull with a stare extraordinarily severe.
"You are quitesure," he said, "I cannot help you?"
"Quite sure, thank you," said Turnbull with broken brevity.
"Goodday."
Then he turned to MacIan who was standing close behind him, andwhose face, now familiar in all its moods, told him easily thatEvan had heard the whole of the strange dialogue.
"Curse those cruel beasts!"
cried Turnbull.
"They've turned himto an imbecile just by burying him alive.
His brain's like apin-point now."
"You are sure he is a lunatic?"
said Evan, slowly.
"Not a lunatic," said Turnbull, "an idiot.
He just points tothings and says that they stick out."
"He had a notion that he could help us," said MacIan moodily, andbegan to pace towards the other end of his cell.
"Yes, it was a bit pathetic," assented Turnbull; "such a Thingoffering help, and besides---- Hallo!
Hallo!
What's the matter?"
"God Almighty guide us all!"
said MacIan.
He was standing heavy and still at the other end of the room andstaring quietly at the door which for thirty days had sealed themup from the sun.
Turnbull, following the other's eye, stared atthe door likewise, and then he also uttered an exclamation.
Theiron door was standing about an inch and a half open.
"He said----" began Evan, in a trembling voice--"he offered----""Come along, you fool!"
shouted Turnbull with a sudden andfurious energy.
"I see it all now, and it's the best stroke ofluck in the world.
You pulled out that iron handle that hadscrewed up his cell, and it somehow altered the machinery andopened all the doors."
Seizing MacIan by the elbow he bundled him bodily out into theopen corridor and ran him on till they saw daylight through ahalf-darkened window.
"All the same," said Evan, like one answering in an ordinaryconversation, "he did ask you whether he could help you."
All this wilderness of windowless passages was so built into theheart of that fortress of fear that it seemed more than an hourbefore the fugitives had any good glimpse of the outer world.
They did not even know what hour of the day it was; and when,turning a corner, they saw the bare tunnel of the corridor endabruptly in a shining square of garden, the grass burning in thatstrong evening sunshine which makes it burnished gold rather thangreen, the abrupt opening on to the earth seemed like a holeknocked in the wall of heaven.
Only once or twice in life is itpermitted to a man thus to see the very universe from outside,and feel existence itself as an adorable adventure not yet begun.
As they found this shining escape out of that hellish labyrinththey both had simultaneously the sensation of being babes unborn,of being asked by God if they would like to live upon the earth.
They were looking in at one of the seven gates of Eden.
Turnbull was the first to leap into the garden, with anearth-spurning leap like that of one who could really spread hiswings and fly.
MacIan, who came an instant after, was less fullof mere animal gusto and fuller of a more fearful and quiveringpleasure in the clear and innocent flower colours and the highand holy trees.
With one bound they were in that cool and clearedlandscape, and they found just outside the door the black-cladgentleman with the cloven chin smilingly regarding them; and hischin seemed to grow longer and longer as he smiled.
XVIII.
A RIDDLE OF FACESJust behind him stood two other doctors: one, the familiar Dr.Quayle, of the blinking eyes and bleating voice; the other, amore commonplace but much more forcible figure, a stout youngdoctor with short, well-brushed hair and a round but resoluteface.
At the sight of the escape these two subordinates uttered acry and sprang forward, but their superior remained motionlessand smiling, and somehow the lack of his support seemed to arrestand freeze them in the very gesture of pursuit.
"Let them be," he cried in a voice that cut like a blade of ice;and not only of ice, but of some awful primordial ice that hadnever been water.
"I want no devoted champions," said the cutting voice; "even thefolly of one's friends bores one at last.
You don't suppose Ishould have let these lunatics out of their cells without goodreason.
I have the best and fullest reason.
They can be let outof their cell today, because today the whole world has becometheir cell.
I will have no more medieval mummery of chains anddoors.
Let them wander about the earth as they wandered aboutthis garden, and I shall still be their easy master.
Let themtake the wings of the morning and abide in the uttermost parts ofthe sea--I am there.
Whither shall they go from my presence andwhither shall they flee from my spirit?
Courage, Dr. Quayle, anddo not be downhearted; the real days of tyranny are onlybeginning on this earth."
And with that the Master laughed and swung away from them, almostas if his laugh was a bad thing for people to see.
"Might I speak to you a moment?"
said Turnbull, stepping forwardwith a respectful resolution.
But the shoulders of the Masteronly seemed to take on a new and unexpected angle of mockery ashe strode away.
Turnbull swung round with great abruptness to the other twodoctors, and said, harshly: "What in snakes does he mean--and whoare you?"
"My name is Hutton," said the short, stout man, "and I am--well,one of those whose business it is to uphold this establishment."
"My name is Turnbull," said the other; "I am one of those whosebusiness it is to tear it to the ground."
The small doctor smiled, and Turnbull's anger seemed suddenly tosteady him.
"But I don't want to talk about that," he said, calmly; "I onlywant to know what the Master of this asylum really means."
Dr. Hutton's smile broke into a laugh which, short as it was, hadthe suspicion of a shake in it.
"I suppose you think that quite asimple question," he said.
"I think it a plain question," said Turnbull, "and one thatdeserves a plain answer.
Why did the Master lock us up in acouple of cupboards like jars of pickles for a mortal month, andwhy does he now let us walk free in the garden again?"
"I understand," said Hutton, with arched eyebrows, "that yourcomplaint is that you are now free to walk in the garden."
"My complaint is," said Turnbull, stubbornly, "that if I am fitto walk freely now, I have been as fit for the last month.
No onehas examined me, no one has come near me.
Your chief says that Iam only free because he has made other arrangements.
What arethose arrangements?"
The young man with the round face looked down for a little whileand smoked reflectively.
The other and elder doctor had gonepacing nervously by himself upon the lawn.
At length the roundface was lifted again, and showed two round blue eyes with acertain frankness in them.
"Well, I don't see that it can do any harm to tell you know," hesaid.
"You were shut up just then because it was just during thatmonth that the Master was bringing off his big scheme.
He wasgetting his bill through Parliament, and organizing the newmedical police.
But of course you haven't heard of all that; infact, you weren't meant to."
"Heard of all what?"
asked the impatient inquirer.
"There's a new law now, and the asylum powers are greatlyextended.
Even if you did escape now, any policeman would takeyou up in the next town if you couldn't show a certificate ofsanity from us."
"Well," continued Dr. Hutton, "the Master described before bothHouses of Parliament the real scientific objection to allexisting legislation about lunacy.
As he very truly said, themistake was in supposing insanity to be merely an exception or anextreme.
Insanity, like forgetfulness, is simply a quality whichenters more or less into all human beings; and for practicalpurposes it is more necessary to know whose mind is reallytrustworthy than whose has some accidental taint.
We havetherefore reversed the existing method, and people now have toprove that they are sane.
In the first village you entered, thevillage constable would notice that you were not wearing on theleft lapel of your coat the small pewter S which is now necessaryto any one who walks about beyond asylum bounds or outside asylumhours."
"You mean to say," said Turnbull, "that this was what the Masterof the asylum urged before the House of Commons?"
Dr. Hutton nodded with gravity.
"And you mean to say," cried Turnbull, with a vibrant snort,"that that proposal was passed in an assembly that calls itselfdemocratic?"
The doctor showed his whole row of teeth in a smile.
"Oh, theassembly calls itself Socialist now," he said, "But we explainedto them that this was a question for men of science."
Turnbull gave one stamp upon the gravel, then pulled himselftogether, and resumed: "But why should your infernal headmedicine-man lock us up in separate cells while he was turningEngland into a madhouse?
I'm not the Prime Minister; we're notthe House of Lords."
"He wasn't afraid of the Prime Minister," replied Dr. Hutton; "heisn't afraid of the House of Lords.
But----""Well?"
inquired Turnbull, stamping again.
"He is afraid of you," said Hutton, simply.
"Why, didn't youknow?"
MacIan, who had not spoken yet, made one stride forward and stoodwith shaking limbs and shining eyes.
"He was afraid!"
began Evan, thickly.
"You mean to say thatwe----""I mean to say the plain truth now that the danger is over," saidHutton, calmly; "most certainly you two were the only people heever was afraid of."
Then he added in a low but not inaudiblevoice: "Except one--whom he feared worse, and has buried deeper."
"Come away," cried MacIan, "this has to be thought about."
Turnbull followed him in silence as he strode away, but justbefore he vanished, turned and spoke again to the doctors.
"But what has got hold of people?"
he asked, abruptly.
"Whyshould all England have gone dotty on the mere subject ofdottiness?"
Dr. Hutton smiled his open smile once more and bowed slightly.
"As to that also," he replied, "I don't want to make you vain."
Turnbull swung round without a word, and he and his companionwere lost in the lustrous leafage of the garden.
They noticednothing special about the scene, except that the garden seemedmore exquisite than ever in the deepening sunset, and that thereseemed to be many more people, whether patients or attendants,walking about in it.
From behind the two black-coated doctors as they stood on thelawn another figure somewhat similarly dressed strode hurriedlypast them, having also grizzled hair and an open flappingfrock-coat.
Both his decisive step and dapper black array markedhim out as another medical man, or at least a man in authority,and as he passed Turnbull the latter was aroused by a strongimpression of having seen the man somewhere before.
It was no onethat he knew well, yet he was certain that it was someone atwhom he had at sometime or other looked steadily.
It was neitherthe face of a friend nor of an enemy; it aroused neitherirritation nor tenderness, yet it was a face which had for somereason been of great importance in his life.
Turning andreturning, and making detours about the garden, he managed tostudy the man's face again and again--a moustached, somewhatmilitary face with a monocle, the sort of face that isaristocratic without being distinguished.
Turnbull could notremember any particular doctors in his decidedly healthyexistence.
Was the man a long-lost uncle, or was he only somebodywho had sat opposite him regularly in a railway train?
At thatmoment the man knocked down his own eye-glass with a gesture ofannoyance; Turnbull remembered the gesture, and the truth sprangup solid in front of him.
The man with the moustaches wasCumberland Vane, the London police magistrate before whom he andMacIan had once stood on their trial.
The magistrate must havebeen transferred to some other official duties--to somethingconnected with the inspection of asylums.
Turnbull's heart gave a leap of excitement which was half hope.
As a magistrate Mr. Cumberland Vane had been somewhat carelessand shallow, but certainly kindly, and not inaccessible to commonsense so long as it was put to him in strictly conventionallanguage.
He was at least an authority of a more human andrefreshing sort than the crank with the wagging beard or thefiend with the forked chin.
He went straight up to the magistrate, and said: "Good evening,Mr. Vane; I doubt if you remember me."
Cumberland Vane screwed the eye-glass into his scowling face foran instant, and then said curtly but not uncivilly: "Yes, Iremember you, sir; assault or battery, wasn't it?--a fellow brokeyour window.
A tall fellow--McSomething--case made rather a noiseafterwards."
"MacIan is the name, sir," said Turnbull, respectfully; "I havehim here with me."
"Eh!"
said Vane very sharply.
"Confound him!
Has he got anythingto do with this game?"
"Mr. Vane," said Turnbull, pacifically, "I will not pretend thateither he or I acted quite decorously on that occasion.
You werevery lenient with us, and did not treat us as criminals when youvery well might.
So I am sure you will give us your testimonythat, even if we were criminals, we are not lunatics in any legalor medical sense whatever.
I am sure you will use your influencefor us."
"My influence!"
repeated the magistrate, with a slight start.
"Idon't quite understand you."
"I don't know in what capacity you are here," continued Turnbull,gravely, "but a legal authority of your distinction mustcertainly be here in an important one.
Whether you are visitingand inspecting the place, or attached to it as some kind ofpermanent legal adviser, your opinion must still----"Cumberland Vane exploded with a detonation of oaths; his face wastransfigured with fury and contempt, and yet in some odd way hedid not seem specially angry with Turnbull.
"But Lord bless us and save us!"
he gasped, at length; "I'm nothere as an official at all.
I'm here as a patient.
The cursedpack of rat-catching chemists all say that I've lost my wits."
"You!"
cried Turnbull with terrible emphasis.
"You!
Lost yourwits!"
In the rush of his real astonishment at this towering unrealityTurnbull almost added: "Why, you haven't got any to lose."
But hefortunately remembered the remains of his desperate diplomacy.
"This can't go on," he said, positively.
"Men like MacIan and Imay suffer unjustly all our lives, but a man like you must haveinfluence."
"There is only one man who has any influence in England now,"said Vane, and his high voice fell to a sudden and convincingquietude.
"Whom do you mean?"
asked Turnbull.
"I mean that cursed fellow with the long split chin," said theother.
"Is it really true," asked Turnbull, "that he has been allowed tobuy up and control such a lot?
What put the country into such astate?"
Mr. Cumberland Vane laughed outright.
"What put the country intosuch a state?"
he asked.
"Why, you did.
When you were fool enoughto agree to fight MacIan, after all, everybody was ready tobelieve that the Bank of England might paint itself pink withwhite spots."
"I don't understand," answered Turnbull.
"Why should you besurprised at my fighting?
I hope I have always fought."
"Well," said Cumberland Vane, airily, "you didn't believe inreligion, you see--so we thought you were safe at any rate.
Youwent further in your language than most of us wanted to go; nogood in just hurting one's mother's feelings, I think.
But ofcourse we all knew you were right, and, really, we relied onyou."
"Did you?"
said the editor of _The Atheist_ with a burstingheart.
"I am sorry you did not tell me so at the time."
He walked away very rapidly and flung himself on a garden seat,and for some six minutes his own wrongs hid from him the huge andhilarious fact that Cumberland Vane had been locked up as alunatic.
The garden of the madhouse was so perfectly planned, and answeredso exquisitely to every hour of daylight, that one could almostfancy that the sunlight was caught there tangled in its tintedtrees, as the wise men of Gotham tried to chain the spring to abush.
Or it seemed as if this ironic paradise still kept itsunique dawn or its special sunset while the rest of the earthlyglobe rolled through its ordinary hours.
There was one evening,or late afternoon, in particular, which Evan MacIan will rememberin the last moments of death.
It was what artists call a daffodilsky, but it is coarsened even by reference to a daffodil.
It wasof that innocent lonely yellow which has never heard of orange,though it might turn quite unconsciously into green.
Against itthe tops, one might say the turrets, of the clipt and orderedtrees were outlined in that shade of veiled violet which tintsthe tops of lavender.
A white early moon was hardly traceableupon that delicate yellow.
MacIan, I say, will remember thistender and transparent evening, partly because of its virgin goldand silver, and partly because he passed beneath it through themost horrible instant of his life.
Turnbull was sitting on his seat on the lawn, and the goldenevening impressed even his positive nature, as indeed it mighthave impressed the oxen in a field.
He was shocked out of hisidle mood of awe by seeing MacIan break from behind the bushesand run across the lawn with an action he had never seen in theman before, with all his experience of the eccentric humours ofthis Celt.
MacIan fell on the bench, shaking it so that itrattled, and gripped it with his knees like one in dreadful painof body.
That particular run and tumble is typical only of a manwho has been hit by some sudden and incurable evil, who is bittenby a viper or condemned to be hanged.
Turnbull looked up in thewhite face of his friend and enemy, and almost turned cold atwhat he saw there.
He had seen the blue but gloomy eyes of thewestern Highlander troubled by as many tempests as his own westHighland seas, but there had always been a fixed star of faithbehind the storms.
Now the star had gone out, and there was onlymisery.
Yet MacIan had the strength to answer the question whereTurnbull, taken by surprise, had not the strength to ask it.
"They are right, they are right!"
he cried.
"O my God!
they areright, Turnbull.
I ought to be here!"
He went on with shapeless fluency as if he no longer had theheart to choose or check his speech.
"I suppose I ought to haveguessed long ago--all my big dreams and schemes--and everyonebeing against us--but I was stuck up, you know."
"Do tell me about it, really," cried the atheist, and, faced withthe furnace of the other's pain, he did not notice that he spokewith the affection of a father.
"I am mad, Turnbull," said Evan, with a dead clearness of speech,and leant back against the garden seat.
"Nonsense," said the other, clutching at the obvious cue ofbenevolent brutality, "this is one of your silly moods."
MacIan shook his head.
"I know enough about myself," he said, "toallow for any mood, though it opened heaven or hell.
But to seethings--to see them walking solid in the sun--things that can'tbe there--real mystics never do that, Turnbull."
"What things?"
asked the other, incredulously.
MacIan lowered his voice.
"I saw _her_," he said, "three minutesago--walking here in this hell yard."
Between trying to look scornful and really looking startled,Turnbull's face was confused enough to emit no speech, and Evanwent on in monotonous sincerity:"I saw her walk behind those blessed trees against that holy skyof gold as plain as I can see her whenever I shut my eyes.
I didshut them, and opened them again, and she was still there--thatis, of course, she wasn't---- She still had a little fur roundher neck, but her dress was a shade brighter than when I reallysaw her."
"My dear fellow," cried Turnbull, rallying a hearty laugh, "thefancies have really got hold of you.
You mistook some other poorgirl here for her."
"Mistook some other----" said MacIan, and words failed himaltogether.
They sat for some moments in the mellow silence of the eveninggarden, a silence that was stifling for the sceptic, but utterlyempty and final for the man of faith.
At last he broke out againwith the words: "Well, anyhow, if I'm mad, I'm glad I'm mad onthat."
Turnbull murmured some clumsy deprecation, and sat stolidlysmoking to collect his thoughts; the next instant he had all hisnerves engaged in the mere effort to sit still.
Across the clear space of cold silver and a pale lemon sky whichwas left by the gap in the ilex-trees there passed a slim, darkfigure, a profile and the poise of a dark head like a bird's,which really pinned him to his seat with the point ofcoincidence.
With an effort he got to his feet, and said with avoice of affected insouciance: "By George!
MacIan, she isuncommonly like----""What!"
cried MacIan, with a leap of eagerness that washeart-breaking, "do you see her, too?"
And the blaze came backinto the centre of his eyes.
Turnbull's tawny eyebrows were pulled together with a peculiarfrown of curiosity, and all at once he walked quickly across thelawn.
MacIan sat rigid, but peered after him with open andparched lips.
He saw the sight which either proved him sane orproved the whole universe half-witted; he saw the man of fleshapproach that beautiful phantom, saw their gestures ofrecognition, and saw them against the sunset joining hands.
He could stand it no longer, but ran across to the path, turnedthe corner and saw standing quite palpable in the eveningsunlight, talking with a casual grace to Turnbull, the face andfigure which had filled his midnights with frightfully vivid ordesperately half-forgotten features.
She advanced quitepleasantly and coolly, and put out her hand.
The moment that hetouched it he knew that he was sane even if the solar system wascrazy.
She was entirely elegant and unembarrassed.
That is the awfulthing about women--they refuse to be emotional at emotionalmoments, upon some such ludicrous pretext as there being someoneelse there.
But MacIan was in a condition of criticism much lessthan the average masculine one, being in fact merely overturnedby the rushing riddle of the events.
Evan does not know to this day what particular question he asked,but he vividly remembers that she answered, and every line orfluctuation of her face as she said it.
"Oh, don't you know?"
she said, smiling, and suddenly lifting herlevel brown eyebrows.
"Haven't you heard the news?
I'm alunatic."
Then she added after a short pause, and with a sort of pride:"I've got a certificate."
Her manner, by the matchless social stoicism of her sex, wasentirely suited to a drawing-room, but Evan's reply fell somewhatfar short of such a standard, as he only said: "What the devil inhell does all this nonsense mean?"
"Really," said the young lady, and laughed.
"I beg your pardon," said the unhappy young man, rather wildly,"but what I mean is, why are you here in an asylum?"
The young woman broke again into one of the maddening andmysterious laughs of femininity.
Then she composed her features,and replied with equal dignity: "Well, if it comes to that, whyare you?"
The fact that Turnbull had strolled away and was investigatingrhododendrons may have been due to Evan's successful prayers tothe other world, or possibly to his own pretty successfulexperience of this one.
But though they two were as isolated as anew Adam and Eve in a pretty ornamental Eden, the lady did notrelax by an inch the rigour of her badinage.
"I am locked up in the madhouse," said Evan, with a sort of stiffpride, "because I tried to keep my promise to you."
"Quite so," answered the inexplicable lady, nodding with aperfectly blazing smile, "and I am locked up because it was to meyou promised."
"It is outrageous!"
cried Evan; "it is impossible!"
"Oh, you can see my certificate if you like," she replied withsome hauteur.
MacIan stared at her and then at his boots, and then at the skyand then at her again.
He was quite sure now that he himself wasnot mad, and the fact rather added to his perplexity.
Then he drew nearer to her, and said in a dry and dreadful voice:"Oh, don't condescend to play the fool with such a fool as me.
Are you really locked up here as a patient--because you helped usto escape?"
"Yes," she said, still smiling, but her steady voice had a shakein it.
Evan flung his big elbow across his forehead and burst intotears.
The pure lemon of the sky faded into purer white as the greatsunset silently collapsed.
The birds settled back into the trees;the moon began to glow with its own light.
Mr. James Turnbullcontinued his botanical researches into the structure of therhododendron.
But the lady did not move an inch until Evan hadflung up his face again; and when he did he saw by the last gleamof sunlight that it was not only his face that was wet.
Mr. James Turnbull had all his life professed a profound interestin physical science, and the phenomena of a good garden werereally a pleasure to him; but after three-quarters of an hour orso even the apostle of science began to find rhododendrus a bore,and was somewhat relieved when an unexpected development ofevents obliged him to transfer his researches to the equallyinteresting subject of hollyhocks, which grew some fifty feetfarther along the path.
The ostensible cause of his removal wasthe unexpected reappearance of his two other acquaintanceswalking and talking laboriously along the way, with the blackhead bent close to the brown one.
Even hollyhocks detainedTurnbull but a short time.
Having rapidly absorbed all theimportant principles affecting the growth of those vegetables, hejumped over a flower-bed and walked back into the building.
Theother two came up along the slow course of the path talking andtalking.
No one but God knows what they said (for they certainlyhave forgotten), and if I remembered it I would not repeat it.
When they parted at the head of the walk she put out her handagain in the same well-bred way, although it trembled; he seemedto restrain a gesture as he let it fall.
"If it is really always to be like this," he said, thickly, "itwould not matter if we were here for ever."
"You tried to kill yourself four times for me," she said,unsteadily, "and I have been chained up as a madwoman for you.
I really think that after that----""Yes, I know," said Evan in a low voice, looking down.
"Afterthat we belong to each other.
We are sort of sold to eachother--until the stars fall."
Then he looked up suddenly, andsaid: "By the way, what is your name?"
"My name is Beatrice Drake," she replied with complete gravity.
"You can see it on my certificate of lunacy."
XIX.
THE LAST PARLEYTurnbull walked away, wildly trying to explain to himself thepresence of two personal acquaintances so different as Vane andthe girl.
As he skirted a low hedge of laurel, an enormously tallyoung man leapt over it, stood in front of him, and almost fellon his neck as if seeking to embrace him.
"Don't you know me?"
almost sobbed the young man, who was in thehighest spirits.
"Ain't I written on your heart, old boy?
I say,what did you do with my yacht?"
"Take your arms off my neck," said Turnbull, irritably.
"Are youmad?"
The young man sat down on the gravel path and went into ecstasiesof laughter.
"No, that's just the fun of it--I'm not mad," hereplied.
"They've shut me up in this place, and I'm not mad."
Andhe went off again into mirth as innocent as wedding-bells.
Turnbull, whose powers of surprise were exhausted, rolled hisround grey eyes and said, "Mr. Wilkinson, I think," because hecould not think of anything else to say.
The tall man sitting on the gravel bowed with urbanity, and said:"Quite at your service.
Not to be confused with the Wilkinsons ofCumberland; and as I say, old boy, what have you done with myyacht?
You see, they've locked me up here--in this garden--and ayacht would be a sort of occupation for an unmarried man."
"I am really horribly sorry," began Turnbull, in the last stageof bated bewilderment and exasperation, "but really----""Oh, I can see you can't have it on you at the moment," said Mr.Wilkinson with much intellectual magnanimity.
"Well, the fact is----" began Turnbull again, and then the phrasewas frozen on his mouth, for round the corner came the goatlikeface and gleaming eye-glasses of Dr. Quayle.
"Ah, my dear Mr. Wilkinson," said the doctor, as if delighted ata coincidence; "and Mr. Turnbull, too.
Why, I want to speak toMr.
Turnbull."
Mr. Turnbull made some movement rather of surrender than assent,and the doctor caught it up exquisitely, showing even more of histwo front teeth.
"I am sure Mr. Wilkinson will excuse us amoment."
And with flying frock-coat he led Turnbull rapidly roundthe corner of a path.
"My dear sir," he said, in a quite affectionate manner, "I do notmind telling you--you are such a very hopeful case--youunderstand so well the scientific point of view; and I don't liketo see you bothered by the really hopeless cases.
They aremonotonous and maddening.
The man you have just been talking to,poor fellow, is one of the strongest cases of pure _idee fixe_that we have.
It's very sad, and I'm afraid utterly incurable.
Hekeeps on telling everybody"--and the doctor lowered his voiceconfidentially--"he tells everybody that two people have taken isyacht.
His account of how he lost it is quite incoherent."
Turnbull stamped his foot on the gravel path, and called out:"Oh, I can't stand this.
Really----""I know, I know," said the psychologist, mournfully; "it is amost melancholy case, and also fortunately a very rare one.
It isso rare, in fact, that in one classification of these maladies itis entered under a heading by itself--Perdinavititis, mentalinflammation creating the impression that one has lost a ship.
Really," he added, with a kind of half-embarrassed guilt, "it'srather a feather in my cap.
I discovered the only existing case ofperdinavititis."
"But this won't do, doctor," said Turnbull, almost tearing hishair, "this really won't do.
The man really did lose a ship.
Indeed, not to put too fine a point on it, I took his ship."
Dr. Quayle swung round for an instant so that his silk-linedovercoat rustled, and stared singularly at Turnbull.
Then he saidwith hurried amiability: "Why, of course you did.
Quite so, quiteso," and with courteous gestures went striding up the gardenpath.
Under the first laburnum-tree he stopped, however, andpulling out his pencil and notebook wrote down feverishly:"Singular development in the Elenthero-maniac, Turnbull.
Suddenmanifestation of Rapinavititis--the delusion that one has stolena ship.
First case ever recorded."
Turnbull stood for an instant staggered into stillness.
Then heran raging round the garden to find MacIan, just as a husband,even a bad husband, will run raging to find his wife if he isfull of a furious query.
He found MacIan stalking moodily aboutthe half-lit garden, after his extraordinary meeting withBeatrice.
No one who saw his slouching stride and sunken headcould have known that his soul was in the seventh heaven ofecstasy.
He did not think; he did not even very definitelydesire.
He merely wallowed in memories, chiefly in materialmemories; words said with a certain cadence or trivial turns ofthe neck or wrist.
Into the middle of his stationary andsenseless enjoyment were thrust abruptly the projecting elbow andthe projecting red beard of Turnbull.
MacIan stepped back alittle, and the soul in his eyes came very slowly to its windows.
When James Turnbull had the glittering sword-point planted uponhis breast he was in far less danger.
For three pulsating secondsafter the interruption MacIan was in a mood to have murdered hisfather.
And yet his whole emotional anger fell from him when he sawTurnbull's face, in which the eyes seemed to be bursting from thehead like bullets.
All the fire and fragrance even of young andhonourable love faded for a moment before that stiff agony ofinterrogation.
"Are you hurt, Turnbull?"
he asked, anxiously.
"I am dying," answered the other quite calmly.
"I am in the quiteliteral sense of the words dying to know something.
I want toknow what all this can possibly mean."
MacIan did not answer, and he continued with asperity: "You arestill thinking about that girl, but I tell you the whole thing isincredible.
She's not the only person here.
I've met the fellowWilkinson, whose yacht we lost.
I've met the very magistrate youwere hauled up to when you broke my window.
What can itmean--meeting all these old people again?
One never meets suchold friends again except in a dream."
Then after a silence he cried with a rending sincerity: "Are youreally there, Evan?
Have you ever been really there?
Am I simplydreaming?"
MacIan had been listening with a living silence to every word,and now his face flamed with one of his rare revelations of life.
"No, you good atheist," he cried; "no, you clean, courteous,reverent, pious old blasphemer.
No, you are not dreaming--you arewaking up."
"What do you mean?"
"There are two states where one meets so many old friends," saidMacIan; "one is a dream, the other is the end of the world."
"And you say----""I say this is not a dream," said Evan in a ringing voice.
"You really mean to suggest----" began Turnbull.
"Be silent!
or I shall say it all wrong," said MacIan, breathinghard.
"It's hard to explain, anyhow.
An apocalypse is theopposite of a dream.
A dream is falser than the outer life.
Butthe end of the world is more actual than the world it ends.
Idon't say this is really the end of the world, but it's somethinglike that--it's the end of something.
All the people are crowdinginto one corner.
Everything is coming to a point."
"What is the point?"
asked Turnbull.
"I can't see it," said Evan; "it is too large and plain."
Then after a silence he said: "I can't see it--and yet I will tryto describe it.
Turnbull, three days ago I saw quite suddenlythat our duel was not right after all."
"Three days ago!"
repeated Turnbull.
"When and why did thisillumination occur?"
"I knew I was not quite right," answered Evan, "the moment I sawthe round eyes of that old man in the cell."
"Old man in the cell!"
repeated his wondering companion.
"Do youmean the poor old idiot who likes spikes to stick out?"
"Yes," said MacIan, after a slight pause, "I mean the poor oldidiot who likes spikes to stick out.
When I saw his eyes andheard his old croaking accent, I knew that it would not reallyhave been right to kill you.
It would have been a venial sin."
"I am much obliged," said Turnbull, gruffly.
"You must give me time," said MacIan, quite patiently, "for I amtrying to tell the whole truth.
I am trying to tell more of itthan I know."
"So you see I confess"--he went on with laborious distinctness--"I confess that all the people who called our duel mad were rightin a way.
I would confess it to old Cumberland Vane and hiseye-glass.
I would confess it even to that old ass in brownflannel who talked to us about Love.
Yes, they are right in away.
I am a little mad."
He stopped and wiped his brow as if he were literally doing heavylabour.
Then he went on:"I am a little mad; but, after all, it is only a little madness.
When hundreds of high-minded men had fought duesl about a jostlewith the elbow or the ace of spades, the whole world need nothave gone wild over my one little wildness.
Plenty of otherpeople have killed themselves between then and now.
But allEngland has gone into captivity in order to take us captive.
AllEngland has turned into a lunatic asylum in order to prove uslunatics.
Compared with the general public, I might positively becalled sane."
He stopped again, and went on with the same air of travailingwith the truth:"When I saw that, I saw everything; I saw the Church and theworld.
The Church in its earthly action has really touched morbidthings--tortures and bleeding visions and blasts ofextermination.
The Church has had her madnesses, and I am one ofthem.
I am the massacre of St. Bartholomew.
I am the Inquisitionof Spain.
I do not say that we have never gone mad, but I saythat we are fit to act as keepers to our enemies.
Massacre iswicked even with a provocation, as in the Bartholomew.
But yourmodern Nietzsche will tell you that massacre would be gloriouswithout a provocation.
Torture should be violently stopped,though the Church is doing it.
But your modern Tolstoy will tellyou that it ought not to be violently stopped whoever is doingit.
In the long run, which is most mad--the Church or the world?
Which is madder, the Spanish priest who permitted tyranny, or thePrussian sophist who admired it?
Which is madder, the Russianpriest who discourages righteous rebellion, or the Russiannovelist who forbids it?
That is the final and blasting test.
Theworld left to itself grows wilder than any creed.
A few days agoyou and I were the maddest people in England.
Now, by God!
Ibelieve we are the sanest.
That is the only real question--whether the Church is really madder than the world.
Let therationalists run their own race, and let us see where _they_ end.
If the world has some healthy balance other than God, let theworld find it.
Does the world find it?
Cut the world loose," hecried with a savage gesture.
"Does the world stand on its ownend?
Does it stand, or does it stagger?"
Turnbull remained silent, and MacIan said to him, looking oncemore at the earth: "It staggers, Turnbull.
It cannot stand byitself; you know it cannot.
It has been the sorrow of your life.
Turnbull, this garden is not a dream, but an apocalypticfulfilment.
This garden is the world gone mad."
Turnbull did not move his head, and he had been listening all thetime; yet, somehow, the other knew that for the first time he waslistening seriously.
"The world has gone mad," said MacIan, "and it has gone mad aboutUs.
The world takes the trouble to make a big mistake about everylittle mistake made by the Church.
That is why they have turnedten counties to a madhouse; that is why crowds of kindly peopleare poured into this filthy melting-pot.
Now is the judgement ofthis world.
The Prince of this World is judged, and he is judgedexactly because he is judging.
There is at last one simplesolution to the quarrel between the ball and the cross----"Turnbull for the first time started.
"The ball and----" he repeated.
"What is the matter with you?"
asked MacIan.
"I had a dream," said Turnbull, thickly and obscurely, "in whichI saw the cross struck crooked and the ball secure----""I had a dream," said MacIan, "in which I saw the cross erect andthe ball invisible.
They were both dreams from hell.
There mustbe some round earth to plant the cross upon.
But here is theawful difference--that the round world will not consent even tocontinue round.
The astronomers are always telling us that it isshaped like an orange, or like an egg, or like a German sausage.
They beat the old world about like a bladder and thump it into athousand shapeless shapes.
Turnbull, we cannot trust the ball tobe always a ball; we cannot trust reason to be reasonable.
In theend the great terrestrial globe will go quite lop-sided, and onlythe cross will stand upright."
There was a long silence, and then Turnbull said, hesitatingly:"Has it occurred to you that since--since those two dreams, orwhatever they were----""Well?"
murmured MacIan.
"Since then," went on Turnbull, in the same low voice, "sincethen we have never even looked for our swords."
"You are right," answered Evan almost inaudibly.
"We have foundsomething which we both hate more than we ever hated each other,and I think I know its name."
Turnbull seemed to frown and flinch for a moment.
"It does notmuch matter what you call it," he said, "so long as you keep outof its way."
The bushes broke and snapped abruptly behind them, and a verytall figure towered above Turnbull with an arrogant stoop and aprojecting chin, a chin of which the shape showed queerly even inits shadow upon the path.
"You see that is not so easy," said MacIan between his teeth.
They looked up into the eyes of the Master, but looked only for amoment.
The eyes were full of a frozen and icy wrath, a kind ofutterly heartless hatred.
His voice was for the first time devoidof irony.
There was no more sarcasm in it than there is in aniron club.
"You will be inside the building in three minutes," he said, withpulverizing precision, "or you will be fired on by the artilleryat all the windows.
There is too much talking in this garden; weintend to close it.
You will be accommodated indoors."
"Ah!"
said MacIan, with a long and satisfied sigh, "then I wasright."
And he turned his back and walked obediently towards thebuilding.
Turnbull seemed to canvass for a few minutes the notionof knocking the Master down, and then fell under the same almostfairy fatalism as his companion.
In some strange way it did seemthat the more smoothly they yielded, the more swiftly wouldevents sweep on to some great collision.
XX.
DIES IRAEAs they advanced towards the asylum they looked up at its rows onrows of windows, and understood the Master's material threat.
Bymeans of that complex but concealed machinery which ran like anetwork of nerves over the whole fabric, there had been shot outunder every window-ledge rows and rows of polished-steelcylinders, the cold miracles of modern gunnery.
They commandedthe whole garden and the whole country-side, and could have blownto pieces an army corps.
This silent declaration of war had evidently had its completeeffect.
As MacIan and Turnbull walked steadily but slowly towardsthe entrance hall of the institution, they could see that most,or at least many, of the patients had already gathered there aswell as the staff of doctors and the whole regiment of keepers andassistants.
But when they entered the lamp-lit hall, and the highiron door was clashed to and locked behind them, yet a newamazement leapt into their eyes, and the stalwart Turnbull almostfell.
For he saw a sight which was indeed, as MacIan hadsaid--either the Day of Judgement or a dream.
Within a few feet of him at one corner of the square of standingpeople stood the girl he had known in Jersey, Madeleine Durand.
She looked straight at him with a steady smile which lit up thescene of darkness and unreason like the light of some honestfireside.
Her square face and throat were thrown back, as herhabit was, and there was something almost sleepy in the genialityof her eyes.
He saw her first, and for a few seconds saw heronly; then the outer edge of his eyesight took in all the otherstaring faces, and he saw all the faces he had ever seen forweeks and months past.
There was the Tolstoyan in Jaeger flannel,with the yellow beard that went backward and the foolish nose andeyes that went forward, with the curiosity of a crank.
He wastalking eagerly to Mr. Gordon, the corpulent Jew shopkeeper whomthey had once gagged in his own shop.
There was the tipsy oldHertfordshire rustic; he was talking energetically to himself.
There was not only Mr. Vane the magistrate, but the clerk of Mr.Vane, the magistrate.
There was not only Miss Drake of themotor-car, but also Miss Drake's chauffeur.
Nothing wild orunfamiliar could have produced upon Turnbull such a nightmareimpression as that ring of familiar faces.
Yet he had oneintellectual shock which was greater than all the others.
Hestepped impulsively forward towards Madeleine, and then waveredwith a kind of wild humility.
As he did so he caught sight ofanother square face behind Madeleine's, a face with long greywhiskers and an austere stare.
It was old Durand, the girls'father; and when Turnbull saw him he saw the last and worstmarvel of that monstrous night.
He remembered Durand; heremembered his monotonous, everlasting lucidity, his stupefyinglysensible views of everything, his colossal contentment withtruisms merely because they were true.
"Confound it all!"
criedTurnbull to himself, "if _he_ is in the asylum, there can't beanyone outside."
He drew nearer to Madeleine, but stilldoubtfully and all the more so because she still smiled at him.
MacIan had already gone across to Beatrice with an air of fright.
Then all these bewildered but partly amicable recognitions werecloven by a cruel voice which always made all human blood turnbitter.
The Master was standing in the middle of the roomsurveying the scene like a great artist looking at a completedpicture.
Handsome as he looked, they had never seen so clearlywhat was really hateful in his face; and even then they couldonly express it by saying that the arched brows and the longemphatic chin gave it always a look of being lit from below, likethe face of some infernal actor.
"This is indeed a cosy party," he said, with glittering eyes.
The Master evidently meant to say more, but before he could sayanything M. Durand had stepped right up to him and was speaking.
He was speaking exactly as a French bourgeois speaks to themanager of a restaurant.
That is, he spoke with rattling andbreathless rapidity, but with no incoherence, and therefore withno emotion.
It was a steady, monotonous vivacity, which came notseemingly from passion, but merely from the reason having beensent off at a gallop.
He was saying something like this:"You refuse me my half-bottle of Medoc, the drink the mostwholesome and the most customary.
You refuse me the company andobedience of my daughter, which Nature herself indicates.
Yourefuse me the beef and mutton, without pretence that it is a fastof the Church.
You now forbid me the promenade, a thing necessaryto a person of my age.
It is useless to tell me that you do allthis by law.
Law rests upon the social contract.
If the citizenfinds himself despoiled of such pleasures and powers as he wouldhave had even in the savage state, the social contract isannulled."
"It's no good chattering away, Monsieur," said Hutton, for theMaster was silent.
"The place is covered with machine-guns.
We'vegot to obey our orders, and so have you."
"The machinery is of the most perfect," assented Durand, somewhatirrelevantly; "worked by petroleum, I believe.
I only ask you toadmit that if such things fall below the comfort of barbarism,the social contract is annulled.
It is a pretty little point oftheory."
"Oh!
I dare say," said Hutton.
Durand bowed quite civilly and withdrew.
"A cosy party," resumed the Master, scornfully, "and yet Ibelieve some of you are in doubt about how we all came together.
I will explain it, ladies and gentlemen; I will explaineverything.
To whom shall I specially address myself?
To Mr.James Turnbull.
He has a scientific mind."
Turnbull seemed to choke with sudden protest.
The Master seemedonly to cough out of pure politeness and proceeded: "Mr. Turnbullwill agree with me," he said, "when I say that we long felt inscientific circles that great harm was done by such a legend asthat of the Crucifixion."
Turnbull growled something which was presumably assent.
The Master went on smoothly: "It was in vain for us to urge thatthe incident was irrelevant; that there were many such fanatics,many such executions.
We were forced to take the thing thoroughlyin hand, to investigate it in the spirit of scientific history,and with the assistance of Mr. Turnbull and others we were happyin being able to announce that this alleged Crucifixion neveroccurred at all."
MacIan lifted his head and looked at the Master steadily, butTurnbull did not look up.
"This, we found, was the only way with all superstitions,"continued the speaker; "it was necessary to deny themhistorically, and we have done it with great success in the caseof miracles and such things.
Now within our own time there arosean unfortunate fuss which threatened (as Mr. Turnbull would say)to galvanize the corpse of Christianity into a fictitiouslife--the alleged case of a Highland eccentric who wanted tofight for the Virgin."
MacIan, quite white, made a step forward, but the speaker did notalter his easy attitude or his flow of words.
"Again we urgedthat this duel was not to be admired, that it was a mere brawl,but the people were ignorant and romantic.
There were signs oftreating this alleged Highlander and his alleged opponent asheroes.
We tried all other means of arresting this reactionaryhero worship.
Working men who betted on the duel were imprisonedfor gambling.
Working men who drank the health of a duellist wereimprisoned for drunkenness.
But the popular excitement about thealleged duel continued, and we had to fall back on our oldhistorical method.
We investigated, on scientific principles, thestory of MacIan's challenge, and we are happy to be able toinform you that the whole story of the attempted duel is a fable.
There never was any challenge.
There never was any man namedMacIan.
It is a melodramatic myth, like Calvary."
Not a soul moved save Turnbull, who lifted his head; yet therewas the sense of a silent explosion.
"The whole story of the MacIan challenge," went on the Master,beaming at them all with a sinister benignity, "has been found tooriginate in the obsessions of a few pathological types, who arenow all fortunately in our care.
There is, for instance, a personhere of the name of Gordon, formerly the keeper of a curiosityshop.
He is a victim of the disease called Vinculomania--theimpression that one has been bound or tied up.
We have also acase of Fugacity (Mr. Whimpey), who imagines that he was chasedby two men."
The indignant faces of the Jew shopkeeper and the Magdalen Donstarted out of the crowd in their indignation, but the speakercontinued:"One poor woman we have with us," he said, in a compassionatevoice, "believes she was in a motor-car with two such men; thisis the well-known illusion of speed on which I need not dwell.
Another wretched woman has the simple egotistic mania that shehas caused the duel.
Madeleine Durand actually professes to havebeen the subject of the fight between MacIan and his enemy, afight which, if it occurred at all, certainly began long before.
But it never occurred at all.
We have taken in hand every personwho professed to have seen such a thing, and proved them all tobe unbalanced.
That is why they are here."
The Master looked round the room, just showing his perfect teethwith the perfection of artistic cruelty, exalted for a moment inthe enormous simplicity of his success, and then walked acrossthe hall and vanished through an inner door.
His two lieutenants,Quayle and Hutton, were left standing at the head of the greatarmy of servants and keepers.
"I hope we shall have no more trouble," said Dr. Quaylepleasantly enough, and addressing Turnbull, who was leaningheavily upon the back of a chair.
Still looking down, Turnbull lifted the chair an inch or two fromthe ground.
Then he suddenly swung it above his head and sent itat the inquiring doctor with an awful crash which sent one of itswooden legs loose along the floor and crammed the doctor gaspinginto a corner.
MacIan gave a great shout, snatched up the loosechair-leg, and, rushing on the other doctor, felled him with ablow.
Twenty attendants rushed to capture the rebels; MacIanflung back three of them and Turnbull went over on top of one,when from behind them all came a shriek as of something quitefresh and frightful.
Two of the three passages leading out of the hall were chokedwith blue smoke.
Another instant and the hall was full of the fogof it, and red sparks began to swarm like scarlet bees.
"The place is on fire!"
cried Quayle with a scream of indecentterror.
"Oh, who can have done it?
How can it have happened?"
A light had come into Turnbull's eyes.
"How did the FrenchRevolution happen?"
he asked.
"Oh, how should I know!"
wailed the other.
"Then I will tell you," said Turnbull; "it happened because somepeople fancied that a French grocer was as respectable as helooked."
Even as he spoke, as if by confirmation, old Mr. Durandre-entered the smoky room quite placidly, wiping the petroleumfrom his hands with a handkerchief.
He had set fire to thebuilding in accordance with the strict principles of the socialcontract.
But MacIan had taken a stride forward and stood there shaken andterrible.
"Now," he cried, panting, "now is the judgement of theworld.
The doctors will leave this place; the keepers will leavethis place.
They will leave us in charge of the machinery and themachine-guns at the windows.
But we, the lunatics, will wait tobe burned alive if only we may see them go."
"How do you know we shall go?"
asked Hutton, fiercely.
"You believe nothing," said MacIan, simply, "and you areinsupportably afraid of death."
"So this is suicide," sneered the doctor; "a somewhat doubtfulsign of sanity."
"Not at all--this is vengeance," answered Turnbull, quite calmly;"a thing which is completely healthy."
"You think the doctors will go," said Hutton, savagely.
"The keepers have gone already," said Turnbull.
Even as they spoke the main doors were burst open in mere brutalpanic, and all the officers and subordinates of the asylum rushedaway across the garden pursued by the smoke.
But among theticketed maniacs not a man or woman moved.
"We hate dying," said Turnbull, with composure, "but we hate youeven more.
This is a successful revolution."
In the roof above their heads a panel shot back, showing a stripof star-lit sky and a huge thing made of white metal, with theshape and fins of a fish, swinging as if at anchor.
At the samemoment a steel ladder slid down from the opening and struck thefloor, and the cleft chin of the mysterious Master was thrustinto the opening.
"Quayle, Hutton," he said, "you will escapewith me."
And they went up the ladder like automata of lead.
Long after they had clambered into the car, the creature with thecloven face continued to leer down upon the smoke-stung crowdbelow.
Then at last he said in a silken voice and with a smile offinal satisfaction:"By the way, I fear I am very absent minded.
There is one manspecially whom, somehow, I always forget.
I always leave himlying about.
Once I mislaid him on the Cross of St. Paul's.
Sosilly of me; and now I've forgotten him in one of those littlecells where your fire is burning.
Very unfortunate--especiallyfor him."
And nodding genially, he climbed into his flying ship.
MacIan stood motionless for two minutes, and then rushed down oneof the suffocating corridors till he found the flames.
Turnbulllooked once at Madeleine, and followed.
*                    *                   *MacIan, with singed hair, smoking garments, and smarting handsand face, had already broken far enough through the firstbarriers of burning timber to come within cry of the cells he hadonce known.
It was impossible, however, to see the spot where theold man lay dead or alive; not now through darkness, but throughscorching and aching light.
The site of the old half-wit's cellwas now the heart of a standing forest of fire--the flames asthick and yellow as a cornfield.
Their incessant shrieking andcrackling was like a mob shouting against an orator.
Yet throughall that deafening density MacIan thought he heard a small andseparate sound.
When he heard it he rushed forward as if toplunge into that furnace, but Turnbull arrested him by an elbow.
"Let me go!"
cried Evan, in agony; "it's the poor old beggar'svoice--he's still alive, and shouting for help."
"Listen!"
said Turnbull, and lifted one finger from his clenchedhand.
"Or else he is shrieking with pain," protested MacIan.
"I willnot endure it."
"Listen!"
repeated Turnbull, grimly.
"Did you ever hear anyoneshout for help or shriek with pain in that voice?"
The small shrill sounds which came through the crash of theconflagration were indeed of an odd sort, and MacIan turned aface of puzzled inquiry to his companion.
"He is singing," said Turnbull, simply.
A remaining rampart fell, crushing the fire, and through thediminished din of it the voice of the little old lunatic cameclearer.
In the heart of that white-hot hell he was singing likea bird.
What he was singing it was not very easy to follow, butit seemed to be something about playing in the golden hay.
"Good Lord!"
cried Turnbull, bitterly, "there seem to be someadvantages in really being an idiot."
Then advancing to thefringe of the fire he called out on chance to the invisiblesinger: "Can you come out?
Are you cut off?"
"God help us all!"
said MacIan, with a shudder; "he's laughingnow."
At whatever stage of being burned alive the invisible now foundhimself, he was now shaking out peals of silvery and hilariouslaughter.
As he listened, MacIan's two eyes began to glow, as ifa strange thought had come into his head.
"Fool, come out and save yourself!"
shouted Turnbull.
"No, by Heaven!
that is not the way," cried Evan, suddenly.
"Father," he shouted, "come out and save us all!"
The fire, though it had dropped in one or two places, was, uponthe whole, higher and more unconquerable than ever.
Separate tallflames shot up and spread out above them like the fiery cloistersof some infernal cathedral, or like a grove of red tropical treesin the garden of the devil.
Higher yet in the purple hollow ofthe night the topmost flames leapt again and again fruitlessly atthe stars, like golden dragons chained but struggling.
The towersand domes of the oppressive smoke seemed high and far enough todrown distant planets in a London fog.
But if we exhausted allfrantic similes for that frantic scene, the main impression aboutthe fire would still be its ranked upstanding rigidity and a sortof roaring stillness.
It was literally a wall of fire.
"Father," cried MacIan, once more, "come out of it and save usall!"
Turnbull was staring at him as he cried.
The tall and steady forest of fire must have been already aportent visible to the whole circle of land and sea.
The redflush of it lit up the long sides of white ships far out in theGerman Ocean, and picked out like piercing rubies the windows inthe villages on the distant heights.
If any villagers or sailorswere looking towards it they must have seen a strange sight asMacIan cried out for the third time.
That forest of fire wavered, and was cloven in the centre; andthen the whole of one half of it leaned one way as a cornfieldleans all one way under the load of the wind.
Indeed, it lookedas if a great wind had sprung up and driven the great fireaslant.
Its smoke was no longer sent up to choke the stars, butwas trailed and dragged across county after county like onedreadful banner of defeat.
But it was not the wind; or, if it was the wind, it was twowinds blowing in opposite directions.
For while one half of thehuge fire sloped one way towards the inland heights, the otherhalf, at exactly the same angle, sloped out eastward towards thesea.
So that earth and ocean could behold, where there had been amere fiery mass, a thing divided like a V--a cloven tongue offlame.
But if it were a prodigy for those distant, it wassomething beyond speech for those quite near.
As the echoes ofEvan's last appeal rang and died in the universal uproar, thefiery vault over his head opened down the middle, and, reelingback in two great golden billows, hung on each side as huge andharmless as two sloping hills lie on each side of a valley.
Downthe centre of this trough, or chasm, a little path ran, clearedof all but ashes, and down this little path was walking a littleold man singing as if he were alone in a wood in spring.
When James Turnbull saw this he suddenly put out a hand andseemed to support himself on the strong shoulder of MadeleineDurand.
Then after a moment's hesitation he put his other hand onthe shoulder of MacIan.
His blue eyes looked extraordinarilybrilliant and beautiful.
In many sceptical papers and magazinesafterwards he was sadly or sternly rebuked for having abandonedthe certainties of materialism.
All his life up to that moment hehad been most honestly certain that materialism was a fact.
Buthe was unlike the writers in the magazines precisely in this--that he preferred a fact even to materialism.
As the little singing figure came nearer and nearer, Evan fell onhis knees, and after an instant Beatrice followed; then Madeleinefell on her knees, and after a longer instant Turnbull followed.
Then the little old man went past them singing down that corridorof flames.
They had not looked at his face.
When he had passed they looked up.
While the first light of thefire had shot east and west, painting the sides of ships withfire-light or striking red sparks out of windowed houses, it hadnot hitherto struck upward, for there was above it the ponderousand rococo cavern of its own monstrous coloured smoke.
But nowthe fire was turned to left and right like a woman's hair partedin the middle, and now the shafts of its light could shoot upinto empty heavens and strike anything, either bird or cloud.
Butit struck something that was neither cloud nor bird.
Far, faraway up in those huge hollows of space something was flyingswiftly and shining brightly, something that shone too bright andflew too fast to be any of the fowls of the air, though the redlight lit it from underneath like the breast of a bird.
Everyoneknew it was a flying ship, and everyone knew whose.
As they stared upward the little speck of light seemed slightlytilted, and two black dots dropped from the edge of it.
All theeager, upturned faces watched the two dots as they grew biggerand bigger in their downward rush.
Then someone screamed, and noone looked up any more.
For the two bodies, larger every secondflying, spread out and sprawling in the fire-light, were the deadbodies of the two doctors whom Professor Lucifer had carried withhim--the weak and sneering Quayle, the cold and clumsy Hutton.
They went with a crash into the thick of the fire.
"They are gone!"
screamed Beatrice, hiding her head.
"O God!
Theare lost!"
Evan put his arm about her, and remembered his own vision.
"No, they are not lost," he said.
"They are saved.
He has takenaway no souls with him, after all."
He looked vaguely about at the fire that was already fading, andthere among the ashes lay two shining things that had survivedthe fire, his sword and Turnbull's, fallen haphazard in thepattern of a cross.
End of Project Gutenberg's The Ball and The Cross, by G.K. Chesterton*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BALL AND THE CROSS ***This file should be named bllcr10.txt or bllcr10.zipCorrected EDITIONS of our eBooks get a new NUMBER, bllcr11.txtVERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, bllcr10a.txtProduced by Ben Crowder <crowderb@blankslate.net>Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the USunless a copyright notice is included.
Thus, we usually do notkeep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advanceof the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,even years after the official publication date.
Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final tilmidnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is atMidnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.
Apreliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, commentand editing by those who wish to do so.
Most people start at our Web sites at:http://gutenberg.net orhttp://promo.net/pgThese Web sites include award-winning information about ProjectGutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our neweBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).
Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcementcan get to them as follows, and just download by date.
This isalso a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as theindexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after anannouncement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.
http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 orftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,as it appears in our Newsletters.
Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.
Thetime it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hoursto get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyrightsearched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.
Ourprojected audience is one hundred million readers.
If the valueper text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new textfiles per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the totalwill reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.
The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.
Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):eBooks Year Month    1  1971 July   10  1991 January  100  1994 January 1000  1997 August 1500  1998 October 2000  1999 December 2500  2000 December 3000  2001 November 4000  2001 October/November 6000  2002 December* 9000  2003 November*10000  2004 January*The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been createdto secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.
We need your donations more than ever!
As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from peopleand organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, NewHampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, SouthDakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, WestVirginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.
We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only onesthat have responded.
As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this listwill be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.
In answer to various questions we have received on this:We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legallyrequest donations in all 50 states.
If your state is not listed andyou would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,just ask.
While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we arenot yet registered, we know of no prohibition against acceptingdonations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer todonate.
International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING abouthow to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be madedeductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there areways.
Donations by check or money order may be sent to:Project Gutenberg Literary Archive FoundationPMB 1131739 University Ave.Oxford, MS 38655-4109Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or paymentmethod other than by check or money order.
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved bythe US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.
Donations aretax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.
As fund-raisingrequirements for other states are met, additions to this list will bemade and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.
We need your donations more than ever!
You can get up to date donation information online at:http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html***If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,you can always email directly to:Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.
We would prefer to send you information by email.
**The Legal Small Print**(Three Pages)***START**THE SMALL PRINT!
**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***Why is this "Small Print!"
statement here?
You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong withyour copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free fromsomeone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not ourfault.
So, among other things, this "Small Print!"
statementdisclaims most of our liability to you.
It also tells you howyou may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.
*BEFORE!
* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOKBy using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tmeBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and acceptthis "Small Print!"
statement.
If you do not, you can receivea refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook bysending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the personyou got it from.
If you received this eBook on a physicalmedium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.
ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKSThis PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hartthrough the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyrighton or for this work, so the Project (and you!)
can copy anddistribute it in the United States without permission andwithout paying copyright royalties.
Special rules, set forthbelow, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBookunder the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.
Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to marketany commercial products without permission.
To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerableefforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domainworks.
Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and anymedium they may be on may contain "Defects".
Among otherthings, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate orcorrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or otherintellectual property infringement, a defective or damageddisk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computercodes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGESBut for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you mayreceive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaimsall liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, includinglegal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE ORUNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVEOR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THEPOSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days ofreceiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within thattime to the person you received it from.
If you received iton a physical medium, you must return it with your note, andsuch person may choose to alternatively give you a replacementcopy.
If you received it electronically, such person maychoose to alternatively give you a second opportunity toreceive it electronically.
THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".
NO OTHERWARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU ASTO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOTLIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR APARTICULAR PURPOSE.
Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties orthe exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so theabove disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and youmay have other legal rights.
INDEMNITYYou will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associatedwith the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tmtexts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, includinglegal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of thefollowing that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,or [3] any Defect.
DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or bydisk, book or any other medium if you either delete this"Small Print!"
and all other references to Project Gutenberg,or:[1]  Only give exact copies of it.
Among other things, this     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the     eBook or this "small print!"
statement.
You may however,     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,     including any form resulting from conversion by word     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as     *EITHER*:     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and          does *not* contain characters other than those          intended by the author of the work, although tilde          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may          be used to convey punctuation intended by the          author, and additional characters may be used to          indicate hypertext links; OR     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is          the case, for instance, with most word processors);          OR     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC          or other equivalent proprietary form).
[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this     "Small Print!"
statement.
[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.
If you     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.
Royalties are     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent     periodic) tax return.
Please contact us beforehand to     let us know your plans and to work out the details.
WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number ofpublic domain and licensed works that can be freely distributedin machine readable form.
The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."
If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment orsoftware or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:hart@pobox.com[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted onlywhen distributed free of all fees.
Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 byMichael S. Hart.
Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not beused in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials bethey hardware or software or any other related product withoutexpress permission.]
*END THE SMALL PRINT!
FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*
