[Sense and Sensibility by Jane Austen 1811]CHAPTER 1The family of Dashwood had long been settled in Sussex.
Their estate was large, and their residence was at Norland Park,in the centre of their property, where, for many generations,they had lived in so respectable a manner as to engagethe general good opinion of their surrounding acquaintance.
The late owner of this estate was a single man, who livedto a very advanced age, and who for many years of his life,had a constant companion and housekeeper in his sister.
But her death, which happened ten years before his own,produced a great alteration in his home; for to supplyher loss, he invited and received into his house the familyof his nephew Mr. Henry Dashwood, the legal inheritorof the Norland estate, and the person to whom he intendedto bequeath it.
In the society of his nephew and niece,and their children, the old Gentleman's days werecomfortably spent.
His attachment to them all increased.
The constant attention of Mr. and Mrs. Henry Dashwoodto his wishes, which proceeded not merely from interest,but from goodness of heart, gave him every degree of solidcomfort which his age could receive; and the cheerfulnessof the children added a relish to his existence.
By a former marriage, Mr. Henry Dashwood had oneson: by his present lady, three daughters.
The son,a steady respectable young man, was amply providedfor by the fortune of his mother, which had been large,and half of which devolved on him on his coming of age.
By his own marriage, likewise, which happened soon afterwards,he added to his wealth.
To him therefore the successionto the Norland estate was not so really important as tohis sisters; for their fortune, independent of what mightarise to them from their father's inheriting that property,could be but small.
Their mother had nothing, and theirfather only seven thousand pounds in his own disposal;for the remaining moiety of his first wife's fortune wasalso secured to her child, and he had only a life-interestin it.
The old gentleman died: his will was read, andlike almost every other will, gave as much disappointmentas pleasure.
He was neither so unjust, nor so ungrateful,as to leave his estate from his nephew;--but he left it to himon such terms as destroyed half the value of the bequest.
Mr. Dashwood had wished for it more for the sake of hiswife and daughters than for himself or his son;--but tohis son, and his son's son, a child of four years old,it was secured, in such a way, as to leave to himselfno power of providing for those who were most dearto him, and who most needed a provision by any chargeon the estate, or by any sale of its valuable woods.
The whole was tied up for the benefit of this child, who,in occasional visits with his father and mother at Norland,had so far gained on the affections of his uncle,by such attractions as are by no means unusual in childrenof two or three years old; an imperfect articulation,an earnest desire of having his own way, many cunning tricks,and a great deal of noise, as to outweigh all the valueof all the attention which, for years, he had receivedfrom his niece and her daughters.
He meant not tobe unkind, however, and, as a mark of his affectionfor the three girls, he left them a thousand pounds a-piece.
Mr. Dashwood's disappointment was, at first, severe;but his temper was cheerful and sanguine; and he mightreasonably hope to live many years, and by living economically,lay by a considerable sum from the produce of an estatealready large, and capable of almost immediate improvement.
But the fortune, which had been so tardy in coming, was hisonly one twelvemonth.
He survived his uncle no longer;and ten thousand pounds, including the late legacies,was all that remained for his widow and daughters.
His son was sent for as soon as his danger was known,and to him Mr. Dashwood recommended, with all the strengthand urgency which illness could command, the interestof his mother-in-law and sisters.
Mr. John Dashwood had not the strong feelings of therest of the family; but he was affected by a recommendationof such a nature at such a time, and he promised to doevery thing in his power to make them comfortable.
His father was rendered easy by such an assurance,and Mr. John Dashwood had then leisure to consider howmuch there might prudently be in his power to do for them.
He was not an ill-disposed young man, unless tobe rather cold hearted and rather selfish is to beill-disposed: but he was, in general, well respected;for he conducted himself with propriety in the dischargeof his ordinary duties.
Had he married a more amiable woman,he might have been made still more respectable than hewas:--he might even have been made amiable himself; for hewas very young when he married, and very fond of his wife.
But Mrs. John Dashwood was a strong caricature of himself;--more narrow-minded and selfish.
When he gave his promise to his father, he meditatedwithin himself to increase the fortunes of his sistersby the present of a thousand pounds a-piece.
He thenreally thought himself equal to it.
The prospect of fourthousand a-year, in addition to his present income,besides the remaining half of his own mother's fortune,warmed his heart, and made him feel capable of generosity.--"Yes, he would give them three thousand pounds: it wouldbe liberal and handsome!
It would be enough to makethem completely easy.
Three thousand pounds!
he couldspare so considerable a sum with little inconvenience."
--He thought of it all day long, and for many days successively,and he did not repent.
No sooner was his father's funeral over, than Mrs. JohnDashwood, without sending any notice of her intention to hermother-in-law, arrived with her child and their attendants.
No one could dispute her right to come; the house washer husband's from the moment of his father's decease;but the indelicacy of her conduct was so much the greater,and to a woman in Mrs. Dashwood's situation, with onlycommon feelings, must have been highly unpleasing;--but in HER mind there was a sense of honor so keen,a generosity so romantic, that any offence of the kind,by whomsoever given or received, was to her a sourceof immoveable disgust.
Mrs. John Dashwood had neverbeen a favourite with any of her husband's family;but she had had no opportunity, till the present,of shewing them with how little attention to the comfortof other people she could act when occasion required it.
So acutely did Mrs. Dashwood feel this ungraciousbehaviour, and so earnestly did she despise herdaughter-in-law for it, that, on the arrival of the latter,she would have quitted the house for ever, had not theentreaty of her eldest girl induced her first to reflecton the propriety of going, and her own tender love for allher three children determined her afterwards to stay,and for their sakes avoid a breach with their brother.
Elinor, this eldest daughter, whose advice wasso effectual, possessed a strength of understanding,and coolness of judgment, which qualified her,though only nineteen, to be the counsellor of her mother,and enabled her frequently to counteract, to the advantageof them all, that eagerness of mind in Mrs. Dashwoodwhich must generally have led to imprudence.
She hadan excellent heart;--her disposition was affectionate,and her feelings were strong; but she knew how to governthem: it was a knowledge which her mother had yet to learn;and which one of her sisters had resolved never to be taught.
Marianne's abilities were, in many respects,quite equal to Elinor's.
She was sensible and clever;but eager in everything: her sorrows, her joys, could haveno moderation.
She was generous, amiable, interesting: shewas everything but prudent.
The resemblance betweenher and her mother was strikingly great.
Elinor saw, with concern, the excess of hersister's sensibility; but by Mrs. Dashwood it was valuedand cherished.
They encouraged each other now in theviolence of their affliction.
The agony of griefwhich overpowered them at first, was voluntarily renewed,was sought for, was created again and again.
They gavethemselves up wholly to their sorrow, seeking increaseof wretchedness in every reflection that could afford it,and resolved against ever admitting consolationin future.
Elinor, too, was deeply afflicted; but stillshe could struggle, she could exert herself.
She couldconsult with her brother, could receive her sister-in-lawon her arrival, and treat her with proper attention;and could strive to rouse her mother to similar exertion,and encourage her to similar forbearance.
Margaret, the other sister, was a good-humored,well-disposed girl; but as she had already imbibeda good deal of Marianne's romance, without havingmuch of her sense, she did not, at thirteen, bid fairto equal her sisters at a more advanced period of life.
CHAPTER 2Mrs. John Dashwood now installed herself mistressof Norland; and her mother and sisters-in-law were degradedto the condition of visitors.
As such, however, they weretreated by her with quiet civility; and by her husbandwith as much kindness as he could feel towards anybodybeyond himself, his wife, and their child.
He reallypressed them, with some earnestness, to consider Norlandas their home; and, as no plan appeared so eligibleto Mrs. Dashwood as remaining there till she couldaccommodate herself with a house in the neighbourhood,his invitation was accepted.
A continuance in a place where everything remindedher of former delight, was exactly what suited her mind.
In seasons of cheerfulness, no temper could be more cheerfulthan hers, or possess, in a greater degree, that sanguineexpectation of happiness which is happiness itself.
But in sorrow she must be equally carried away by her fancy,and as far beyond consolation as in pleasure she wasbeyond alloy.
Mrs. John Dashwood did not at all approve of what herhusband intended to do for his sisters.
To take threethousand pounds from the fortune of their dear little boywould be impoverishing him to the most dreadful degree.
She begged him to think again on the subject.
How couldhe answer it to himself to rob his child, and his onlychild too, of so large a sum?
And what possible claimcould the Miss Dashwoods, who were related to him only byhalf blood, which she considered as no relationship at all,have on his generosity to so large an amount.
It was verywell known that no affection was ever supposed to existbetween the children of any man by different marriages;and why was he to ruin himself, and their poor little Harry,by giving away all his money to his half sisters?
"It was my father's last request to me," repliedher husband, "that I should assist his widow and daughters."
"He did not know what he was talking of, I dare say;ten to one but he was light-headed at the time.
Had he been in his right senses, he could not have thoughtof such a thing as begging you to give away half yourfortune from your own child."
"He did not stipulate for any particular sum,my dear Fanny; he only requested me, in general terms,to assist them, and make their situation more comfortablethan it was in his power to do.
Perhaps it wouldhave been as well if he had left it wholly to myself.
He could hardly suppose I should neglect them.
But as he required the promise, I could not do lessthan give it; at least I thought so at the time.
The promise, therefore, was given, and must be performed.
Something must be done for them whenever they leave Norlandand settle in a new home."
"Well, then, LET something be done for them;but THAT something need not be three thousand pounds.
Consider," she added, "that when the money is onceparted with, it never can return.
Your sisters will marry,and it will be gone for ever.
If, indeed, it couldbe restored to our poor little boy--""Why, to be sure," said her husband, very gravely,"that would make great difference.
The time may come whenHarry will regret that so large a sum was parted with.
If he should have a numerous family, for instance, it wouldbe a very convenient addition."
"To be sure it would."
"Perhaps, then, it would be better for all parties,if the sum were diminished one half.--Five hundred poundswould be a prodigious increase to their fortunes!"
"Oh!
beyond anything great!
What brother on earthwould do half so much for his sisters, even if REALLYhis sisters!
And as it is--only half blood!--But youhave such a generous spirit!"
"I would not wish to do any thing mean," he replied.
"One had rather, on such occasions, do too much thantoo little.
No one, at least, can think I have notdone enough for them: even themselves, they can hardlyexpect more."
"There is no knowing what THEY may expect,"said the lady, "but we are not to think of theirexpectations: the question is, what you can afford to do."
"Certainly--and I think I may afford to give them fivehundred pounds a-piece.
As it is, without any additionof mine, they will each have about three thousand poundson their mother's death--a very comfortable fortunefor any young woman."
"To be sure it is; and, indeed, it strikes me thatthey can want no addition at all.
They will have tenthousand pounds divided amongst them.
If they marry,they will be sure of doing well, and if they do not,they may all live very comfortably together on the interestof ten thousand pounds."
"That is very true, and, therefore, I do not know whether,upon the whole, it would not be more advisable to dosomething for their mother while she lives, rather thanfor them--something of the annuity kind I mean.--My sisterswould feel the good effects of it as well as herself.
A hundred a year would make them all perfectly comfortable."
His wife hesitated a little, however, in givingher consent to this plan.
"To be sure," said she, "it is better than parting withfifteen hundred pounds at once.
But, then, if Mrs. Dashwoodshould live fifteen years we shall be completely taken in."
"Fifteen years!
my dear Fanny; her life cannotbe worth half that purchase."
"Certainly not; but if you observe, people alwayslive for ever when there is an annuity to be paid them;and she is very stout and healthy, and hardly forty.
An annuity is a very serious business; it comes overand over every year, and there is no getting ridof it.
You are not aware of what you are doing.
I have known a great deal of the trouble of annuities;for my mother was clogged with the payment of threeto old superannuated servants by my father's will,and it is amazing how disagreeable she found it.
Twice every year these annuities were to be paid; and thenthere was the trouble of getting it to them; and then oneof them was said to have died, and afterwards it turnedout to be no such thing.
My mother was quite sick of it.
Her income was not her own, she said, with such perpetualclaims on it; and it was the more unkind in my father,because, otherwise, the money would have been entirely atmy mother's disposal, without any restriction whatever.
It has given me such an abhorrence of annuities, that I amsure I would not pin myself down to the payment of one forall the world."
"It is certainly an unpleasant thing," replied Mr. Dashwood,"to have those kind of yearly drains on one's income.
One's fortune, as your mother justly says, is NOT one's own.
To be tied down to the regular payment of such a sum,on every rent day, is by no means desirable: it takes awayone's independence."
"Undoubtedly; and after all you have no thanks for it.
They think themselves secure, you do no more than whatis expected, and it raises no gratitude at all.
If I were you,whatever I did should be done at my own discretion entirely.
I would not bind myself to allow them any thing yearly.
It may be very inconvenient some years to spare a hundred,or even fifty pounds from our own expenses."
"I believe you are right, my love; it will be betterthat there should by no annuity in the case; whatever Imay give them occasionally will be of far greater assistancethan a yearly allowance, because they would only enlargetheir style of living if they felt sure of a larger income,and would not be sixpence the richer for it at the endof the year.
It will certainly be much the best way.
A present of fifty pounds, now and then, will preventtheir ever being distressed for money, and will, I think,be amply discharging my promise to my father."
"To be sure it will.
Indeed, to say the truth,I am convinced within myself that your father had no ideaof your giving them any money at all.
The assistancehe thought of, I dare say, was only such as might bereasonably expected of you; for instance, such as lookingout for a comfortable small house for them, helping themto move their things, and sending them presents of fishand game, and so forth, whenever they are in season.
I'll lay my life that he meant nothing farther; indeed,it would be very strange and unreasonable if he did.
Do but consider, my dear Mr. Dashwood, how excessivelycomfortable your mother-in-law and her daughters may liveon the interest of seven thousand pounds, besides thethousand pounds belonging to each of the girls, which bringsthem in fifty pounds a year a-piece, and, of course,they will pay their mother for their board out of it.
Altogether, they will have five hundred a-year amongst them,and what on earth can four women want for more thanthat?--They will live so cheap!
Their housekeeping willbe nothing at all.
They will have no carriage, no horses,and hardly any servants; they will keep no company,and can have no expenses of any kind!
Only conceivehow comfortable they will be!
Five hundred a year!
I amsure I cannot imagine how they will spend half of it;and as to your giving them more, it is quite absurd to thinkof it.
They will be much more able to give YOU something."
"Upon my word," said Mr. Dashwood, "I believe youare perfectly right.
My father certainly could meannothing more by his request to me than what you say.
I clearly understand it now, and I will strictly fulfilmy engagement by such acts of assistance and kindnessto them as you have described.
When my mother removesinto another house my services shall be readily givento accommodate her as far as I can.
Some little presentof furniture too may be acceptable then."
"Certainly," returned Mrs. John Dashwood.
"But, however,ONE thing must be considered.
When your father and mothermoved to Norland, though the furniture of Stanhillwas sold, all the china, plate, and linen was saved,and is now left to your mother.
Her house will thereforebe almost completely fitted up as soon as she takes it."
"That is a material consideration undoubtedly.
A valuable legacy indeed!
And yet some of the plate wouldhave been a very pleasant addition to our own stock here."
"Yes; and the set of breakfast china is twiceas handsome as what belongs to this house.
A greatdeal too handsome, in my opinion, for any place THEYcan ever afford to live in.
But, however, so it is.
Your father thought only of THEM.
And I must say this:that you owe no particular gratitude to him, nor attentionto his wishes; for we very well know that if he could,he would have left almost everything in the world to THEM."
This argument was irresistible.
It gave to hisintentions whatever of decision was wanting before; and hefinally resolved, that it would be absolutely unnecessary,if not highly indecorous, to do more for the widowand children of his father, than such kind of neighbourlyacts as his own wife pointed out.
CHAPTER 3Mrs. Dashwood remained at Norland several months;not from any disinclination to move when the sight of everywell known spot ceased to raise the violent emotion which itproduced for a while; for when her spirits began to revive,and her mind became capable of some other exertion than thatof heightening its affliction by melancholy remembrances,she was impatient to be gone, and indefatigable in her inquiriesfor a suitable dwelling in the neighbourhood of Norland;for to remove far from that beloved spot was impossible.
But she could hear of no situation that at once answeredher notions of comfort and ease, and suited the prudenceof her eldest daughter, whose steadier judgment rejectedseveral houses as too large for their income, which hermother would have approved.
Mrs. Dashwood had been informed by her husband of thesolemn promise on the part of his son in their favour,which gave comfort to his last earthly reflections.
She doubted the sincerity of this assurance no more than hehad doubted it himself, and she thought of it for her daughters'sake with satisfaction, though as for herself she waspersuaded that a much smaller provision than 7000L wouldsupport her in affluence.
For their brother's sake, too,for the sake of his own heart, she rejoiced; and shereproached herself for being unjust to his merit before,in believing him incapable of generosity.
His attentivebehaviour to herself and his sisters convinced her thattheir welfare was dear to him, and, for a long time,she firmly relied on the liberality of his intentions.
The contempt which she had, very early in their acquaintance,felt for her daughter-in-law, was very much increasedby the farther knowledge of her character, which halfa year's residence in her family afforded; and perhapsin spite of every consideration of politeness or maternalaffection on the side of the former, the two ladies mighthave found it impossible to have lived together so long,had not a particular circumstance occurred to givestill greater eligibility, according to the opinionsof Mrs. Dashwood, to her daughters' continuance at Norland.
This circumstance was a growing attachment betweenher eldest girl and the brother of Mrs. John Dashwood,a gentleman-like and pleasing young man, who was introducedto their acquaintance soon after his sister's establishmentat Norland, and who had since spent the greatest partof his time there.
Some mothers might have encouraged the intimacy frommotives of interest, for Edward Ferrars was the eldest sonof a man who had died very rich; and some might have repressedit from motives of prudence, for, except a trifling sum,the whole of his fortune depended on the will of his mother.
But Mrs. Dashwood was alike uninfluenced by either consideration.
It was enough for her that he appeared to be amiable,that he loved her daughter, and that Elinor returnedthe partiality.
It was contrary to every doctrine ofher's that difference of fortune should keep any coupleasunder who were attracted by resemblance of disposition;and that Elinor's merit should not be acknowledgedby every one who knew her, was to her comprehension impossible.
Edward Ferrars was not recommended to their goodopinion by any peculiar graces of person or address.
He was not handsome, and his manners required intimacyto make them pleasing.
He was too diffident to do justiceto himself; but when his natural shyness was overcome,his behaviour gave every indication of an open,affectionate heart.
His understanding was good,and his education had given it solid improvement.
But he was neither fitted by abilities nor dispositionto answer the wishes of his mother and sister, who longedto see him distinguished--as--they hardly knew what.
They wanted him to make a fine figure in the world in somemanner or other.
His mother wished to interest him inpolitical concerns, to get him into parliament, or to seehim connected with some of the great men of the day.
Mrs. John Dashwood wished it likewise; but in the mean while,till one of these superior blessings could be attained, it wouldhave quieted her ambition to see him driving a barouche.
But Edward had no turn for great men or barouches.
All his wishes centered in domestic comfort and the quietof private life.
Fortunately he had a younger brotherwho was more promising.
Edward had been staying several weeks in the housebefore he engaged much of Mrs. Dashwood's attention;for she was, at that time, in such affliction as renderedher careless of surrounding objects.
She saw only that hewas quiet and unobtrusive, and she liked him for it.
He did not disturb the wretchedness of her mind byill-timed conversation.
She was first called to observeand approve him farther, by a reflection which Elinorchanced one day to make on the difference between himand his sister.
It was a contrast which recommended himmost forcibly to her mother.
"It is enough," said she; "to say that he is unlikeFanny is enough.
It implies everything amiable.
I love him already."
"I think you will like him," said Elinor, "when youknow more of him."
"Like him!"
replied her mother with a smile.
"I feel no sentiment of approbation inferior to love."
"You may esteem him."
"I have never yet known what it was to separateesteem and love."
Mrs. Dashwood now took pains to get acquainted with him.
Her manners were attaching, and soon banished his reserve.
She speedily comprehended all his merits; the persuasionof his regard for Elinor perhaps assisted her penetration;but she really felt assured of his worth: and even thatquietness of manner, which militated against all herestablished ideas of what a young man's address ought to be,was no longer uninteresting when she knew his heart to bewarm and his temper affectionate.
No sooner did she perceive any symptom of lovein his behaviour to Elinor, than she considered theirserious attachment as certain, and looked forwardto their marriage as rapidly approaching.
"In a few months, my dear Marianne."
said she,"Elinor will, in all probability be settled for life.
We shall miss her; but SHE will be happy."
"Oh!
Mamma, how shall we do without her?"
"My love, it will be scarcely a separation.
We shall live within a few miles of each other, and shallmeet every day of our lives.
You will gain a brother,a real, affectionate brother.
I have the highest opinionin the world of Edward's heart.
But you look grave,Marianne; do you disapprove your sister's choice?"
"Perhaps," said Marianne, "I may consider itwith some surprise.
Edward is very amiable, and I lovehim tenderly.
But yet--he is not the kind of youngman--there is something wanting--his figure is not striking;it has none of that grace which I should expectin the man who could seriously attach my sister.
His eyes want all that spirit, that fire, which at onceannounce virtue and intelligence.
And besides all this,I am afraid, Mamma, he has no real taste.
Music seemsscarcely to attract him, and though he admires Elinor'sdrawings very much, it is not the admiration of a personwho can understand their worth.
It is evident, in spite ofhis frequent attention to her while she draws, that in facthe knows nothing of the matter.
He admires as a lover,not as a connoisseur.
To satisfy me, those charactersmust be united.
I could not be happy with a man whosetaste did not in every point coincide with my own.
He must enter into all my feelings; the same books,the same music must charm us both.
Oh!
mama, how spiritless,how tame was Edward's manner in reading to us last night!
I felt for my sister most severely.
Yet she bore itwith so much composure, she seemed scarcely to notice it.
I could hardly keep my seat.
To hear those beautiful lineswhich have frequently almost driven me wild, pronouncedwith such impenetrable calmness, such dreadful indifference!"
--"He would certainly have done more justice tosimple and elegant prose.
I thought so at the time;but you WOULD give him Cowper."
"Nay, Mamma, if he is not to be animated by Cowper!--but we must allow for difference of taste.
Elinor hasnot my feelings, and therefore she may overlook it, andbe happy with him.
But it would have broke MY heart,had I loved him, to hear him read with so little sensibility.
Mama, the more I know of the world, the more am I convincedthat I shall never see a man whom I can really love.
I require so much!
He must have all Edward's virtues,and his person and manners must ornament his goodnesswith every possible charm."
"Remember, my love, that you are not seventeen.
It is yet too early in life to despair of such a happiness.
Why should you be less fortunate than your mother?
Inone circumstance only, my Marianne, may your destiny bedifferent from her's!"
CHAPTER 4"What a pity it is, Elinor," said Marianne,"that Edward should have no taste for drawing."
"No taste for drawing!"
replied Elinor, "why shouldyou think so?
He does not draw himself, indeed, but he hasgreat pleasure in seeing the performances of other people,and I assure you he is by no means deficient in natural taste,though he has not had opportunities of improving it.
Had he ever been in the way of learning, I think he wouldhave drawn very well.
He distrusts his own judgmentin such matters so much, that he is always unwillingto give his opinion on any picture; but he has an innatepropriety and simplicity of taste, which in generaldirect him perfectly right."
Marianne was afraid of offending, and said no moreon the subject; but the kind of approbation which Elinordescribed as excited in him by the drawings of otherpeople, was very far from that rapturous delight, which,in her opinion, could alone be called taste.
Yet, thoughsmiling within herself at the mistake, she honouredher sister for that blind partiality to Edward which produced it.
"I hope, Marianne," continued Elinor, "you do notconsider him as deficient in general taste.
Indeed, I thinkI may say that you cannot, for your behaviour to himis perfectly cordial, and if THAT were your opinion,I am sure you could never be civil to him."
Marianne hardly knew what to say.
She wouldnot wound the feelings of her sister on any account,and yet to say what she did not believe was impossible.
At length she replied:"Do not be offended, Elinor, if my praise of himis not in every thing equal to your sense of his merits.
I have not had so many opportunities of estimating the minuterpropensities of his mind, his inclinations and tastes,as you have; but I have the highest opinion in the worldof his goodness and sense.
I think him every thing that isworthy and amiable."
"I am sure," replied Elinor, with a smile,"that his dearest friends could not be dissatisfiedwith such commendation as that.
I do not perceivehow you could express yourself more warmly."
Marianne was rejoiced to find her sister so easily pleased.
"Of his sense and his goodness," continued Elinor,"no one can, I think, be in doubt, who has seen himoften enough to engage him in unreserved conversation.
The excellence of his understanding and his principlescan be concealed only by that shyness which too oftenkeeps him silent.
You know enough of him to do justiceto his solid worth.
But of his minuter propensities,as you call them you have from peculiar circumstancesbeen kept more ignorant than myself.
He and I havebeen at times thrown a good deal together, while youhave been wholly engrossed on the most affectionateprinciple by my mother.
I have seen a great deal of him,have studied his sentiments and heard his opinion onsubjects of literature and taste; and, upon the whole,I venture to pronounce that his mind is well-informed,enjoyment of books exceedingly great, his imagination lively,his observation just and correct, and his taste delicateand pure.
His abilities in every respect improveas much upon acquaintance as his manners and person.
At first sight, his address is certainly not striking;and his person can hardly be called handsome, till theexpression of his eyes, which are uncommonly good,and the general sweetness of his countenance, is perceived.
At present, I know him so well, that I think himreally handsome; or at least, almost so.
What say you,Marianne?"
"I shall very soon think him handsome, Elinor, if Ido not now.
When you tell me to love him as a brother,I shall no more see imperfection in his face, than I now doin his heart."
Elinor started at this declaration, and was sorry forthe warmth she had been betrayed into, in speaking of him.
She felt that Edward stood very high in her opinion.
She believed the regard to be mutual; but she requiredgreater certainty of it to make Marianne's convictionof their attachment agreeable to her.
She knew thatwhat Marianne and her mother conjectured one moment,they believed the next--that with them, to wish was to hope,and to hope was to expect.
She tried to explain the realstate of the case to her sister.
"I do not attempt to deny," said she, "that I thinkvery highly of him--that I greatly esteem, that I like him."
Marianne here burst forth with indignation--"Esteem him!
Like him!
Cold-hearted Elinor!
Oh!
worse than cold-hearted!
Ashamed of being otherwise.
Use those words again, and I will leave the room this moment."
Elinor could not help laughing.
"Excuse me,"said she; "and be assured that I meant no offence to you,by speaking, in so quiet a way, of my own feelings.
Believe them to be stronger than I have declared;believe them, in short, to be such as his merit, and thesuspicion--the hope of his affection for me may warrant,without imprudence or folly.
But farther than this you mustnot believe.
I am by no means assured of his regard for me.
There are moments when the extent of it seems doubtful;and till his sentiments are fully known, you cannot wonderat my wishing to avoid any encouragement of my own partiality,by believing or calling it more than it is.
In my heartI feel little--scarcely any doubt of his preference.
But there are other points to be considered besideshis inclination.
He is very far from being independent.
What his mother really is we cannot know; but, from Fanny'soccasional mention of her conduct and opinions, we havenever been disposed to think her amiable; and I am verymuch mistaken if Edward is not himself aware that therewould be many difficulties in his way, if he were to wishto marry a woman who had not either a great fortune orhigh rank."
Marianne was astonished to find how much the imaginationof her mother and herself had outstripped the truth.
"And you really are not engaged to him!"
said she.
"Yet it certainly soon will happen.
But two advantageswill proceed from this delay.
I shall not lose you so soon,and Edward will have greater opportunity of improvingthat natural taste for your favourite pursuit which mustbe so indispensably necessary to your future felicity.
Oh!
if he should be so far stimulated by your genius as tolearn to draw himself, how delightful it would be!"
Elinor had given her real opinion to her sister.
She could not consider her partiality for Edwardin so prosperous a state as Marianne had believed it.
There was, at times, a want of spirits about him which,if it did not denote indifference, spoke of something almostas unpromising.
A doubt of her regard, supposing himto feel it, need not give him more than inquietude.
It would not be likely to produce that dejection of mindwhich frequently attended him.
A more reasonable causemight be found in the dependent situation which forbadethe indulgence of his affection.
She knew that his motherneither behaved to him so as to make his home comfortableat present, nor to give him any assurance that he might forma home for himself, without strictly attending to her viewsfor his aggrandizement.
With such a knowledge as this,it was impossible for Elinor to feel easy on the subject.
She was far from depending on that result of his preferenceof her, which her mother and sister still consideredas certain.
Nay, the longer they were together the moredoubtful seemed the nature of his regard; and sometimes,for a few painful minutes, she believed it to be no morethan friendship.
But, whatever might really be its limits, it was enough,when perceived by his sister, to make her uneasy,and at the same time, (which was still more common,)to make her uncivil.
She took the first opportunity ofaffronting her mother-in-law on the occasion, talking toher so expressively of her brother's great expectations,of Mrs. Ferrars's resolution that both her sons shouldmarry well, and of the danger attending any young womanwho attempted to DRAW HIM IN; that Mrs. Dashwood couldneither pretend to be unconscious, nor endeavor to be calm.
She gave her an answer which marked her contempt,and instantly left the room, resolving that, whatever mightbe the inconvenience or expense of so sudden a removal,her beloved Elinor should not be exposed another weekto such insinuations.
In this state of her spirits, a letter was deliveredto her from the post, which contained a proposalparticularly well timed.
It was the offer of a small house,on very easy terms, belonging to a relation of her own,a gentleman of consequence and property in Devonshire.
The letter was from this gentleman himself, and writtenin the true spirit of friendly accommodation.
He understood that she was in need of a dwelling;and though the house he now offered her was merely a cottage,he assured her that everything should be done to it whichshe might think necessary, if the situation pleased her.
He earnestly pressed her, after giving the particularsof the house and garden, to come with her daughters toBarton Park, the place of his own residence, from whenceshe might judge, herself, whether Barton Cottage, for thehouses were in the same parish, could, by any alteration,be made comfortable to her.
He seemed really anxious toaccommodate them and the whole of his letter was writtenin so friendly a style as could not fail of giving pleasureto his cousin; more especially at a moment when she wassuffering under the cold and unfeeling behaviour of hernearer connections.
She needed no time for deliberationor inquiry.
Her resolution was formed as she read.
The situation of Barton, in a county so far distant fromSussex as Devonshire, which, but a few hours before,would have been a sufficient objection to outweigh everypossible advantage belonging to the place, was now itsfirst recommendation.
To quit the neighbourhood of Norlandwas no longer an evil; it was an object of desire;it was a blessing, in comparison of the misery of continuingher daughter-in-law's guest; and to remove for everfrom that beloved place would be less painful than toinhabit or visit it while such a woman was its mistress.
She instantly wrote Sir John Middleton her acknowledgmentof his kindness, and her acceptance of his proposal;and then hastened to shew both letters to her daughters,that she might be secure of their approbation before heranswer were sent.
Elinor had always thought it would be more prudentfor them to settle at some distance from Norland,than immediately amongst their present acquaintance.
On THAT head, therefore, it was not for her to opposeher mother's intention of removing into Devonshire.
The house, too, as described by Sir John, was on sosimple a scale, and the rent so uncommonly moderate,as to leave her no right of objection on either point;and, therefore, though it was not a plan which broughtany charm to her fancy, though it was a removal fromthe vicinity of Norland beyond her wishes, she madeno attempt to dissuade her mother from sending a letterof acquiescence.
CHAPTER 5No sooner was her answer dispatched, than Mrs. Dashwoodindulged herself in the pleasure of announcing to herson-in-law and his wife that she was provided with a house,and should incommode them no longer than till every thing wereready for her inhabiting it.
They heard her with surprise.
Mrs. John Dashwood said nothing; but her husband civillyhoped that she would not be settled far from Norland.
She had great satisfaction in replying that she was goinginto Devonshire.--Edward turned hastily towards her,on hearing this, and, in a voice of surprise and concern,which required no explanation to her, repeated,"Devonshire!
Are you, indeed, going there?
So far from hence!
And to what part of it?"
She explained the situation.
It was within four miles northward of Exeter.
"It is but a cottage," she continued, "but I hopeto see many of my friends in it.
A room or two caneasily be added; and if my friends find no difficultyin travelling so far to see me, I am sure I will findnone in accommodating them."
She concluded with a very kind invitation toMr. and Mrs. John Dashwood to visit her at Barton;and to Edward she gave one with still greater affection.
Though her late conversation with her daughter-in-law hadmade her resolve on remaining at Norland no longer thanwas unavoidable, it had not produced the smallest effecton her in that point to which it principally tended.
To separate Edward and Elinor was as far from being herobject as ever; and she wished to show Mrs. John Dashwood,by this pointed invitation to her brother, how totally shedisregarded her disapprobation of the match.
Mr. John Dashwood told his mother again and againhow exceedingly sorry he was that she had taken a house atsuch a distance from Norland as to prevent his being of anyservice to her in removing her furniture.
He really feltconscientiously vexed on the occasion; for the very exertionto which he had limited the performance of his promise tohis father was by this arrangement rendered impracticable.--The furniture was all sent around by water.
It chieflyconsisted of household linen, plate, china, and books,with a handsome pianoforte of Marianne's.
Mrs. JohnDashwood saw the packages depart with a sigh: she couldnot help feeling it hard that as Mrs. Dashwood's incomewould be so trifling in comparison with their own,she should have any handsome article of furniture.
Mrs. Dashwood took the house for a twelvemonth; it wasready furnished, and she might have immediate possession.
No difficulty arose on either side in the agreement; and shewaited only for the disposal of her effects at Norland,and to determine her future household, before she setoff for the west; and this, as she was exceedingly rapidin the performance of everything that interested her,was soon done.--The horses which were left her by her husbandhad been sold soon after his death, and an opportunitynow offering of disposing of her carriage, she agreedto sell that likewise at the earnest advice of hereldest daughter.
For the comfort of her children, had sheconsulted only her own wishes, she would have kept it;but the discretion of Elinor prevailed.
HER wisdomtoo limited the number of their servants to three;two maids and a man, with whom they were speedily providedfrom amongst those who had formed their establishmentat Norland.
The man and one of the maids were sent off immediatelyinto Devonshire, to prepare the house for their mistress'sarrival; for as Lady Middleton was entirely unknownto Mrs. Dashwood, she preferred going directly to thecottage to being a visitor at Barton Park; and she reliedso undoubtingly on Sir John's description of the house,as to feel no curiosity to examine it herself till sheentered it as her own.
Her eagerness to be gone from Norlandwas preserved from diminution by the evident satisfactionof her daughter-in-law in the prospect of her removal;a satisfaction which was but feebly attempted to be concealedunder a cold invitation to her to defer her departure.
Now was the time when her son-in-law's promise to hisfather might with particular propriety be fulfilled.
Since he had neglected to do it on first coming tothe estate, their quitting his house might be lookedon as the most suitable period for its accomplishment.
But Mrs. Dashwood began shortly to give over everyhope of the kind, and to be convinced, from the generaldrift of his discourse, that his assistance extended nofarther than their maintenance for six months at Norland.
He so frequently talked of the increasing expensesof housekeeping, and of the perpetual demands upon his purse,which a man of any consequence in the world was beyondcalculation exposed to, that he seemed rather to standin need of more money himself than to have any design ofgiving money away.
In a very few weeks from the day which brought SirJohn Middleton's first letter to Norland, every thing wasso far settled in their future abode as to enableMrs. Dashwood and her daughters to begin their journey.
Many were the tears shed by them in their lastadieus to a place so much beloved.
"Dear, dear Norland!"
said Marianne, as she wandered alone before the house,on the last evening of their being there; "when shall I ceaseto regret you!--when learn to feel a home elsewhere!--Oh!
happy house, could you know what I suffer in now viewingyou from this spot, from whence perhaps I may viewyou no more!--And you, ye well-known trees!--but youwill continue the same.--No leaf will decay because weare removed, nor any branch become motionless although wecan observe you no longer!--No; you will continue the same;unconscious of the pleasure or the regret you occasion,and insensible of any change in those who walk under yourshade!--But who will remain to enjoy you?"
CHAPTER 6The first part of their journey was performed in toomelancholy a disposition to be otherwise than tediousand unpleasant.
But as they drew towards the end of it,their interest in the appearance of a country which theywere to inhabit overcame their dejection, and a view ofBarton Valley as they entered it gave them cheerfulness.
It was a pleasant fertile spot, well wooded, and richin pasture.
After winding along it for more than a mile,they reached their own house.
A small green court wasthe whole of its demesne in front; and a neat wicket gateadmitted them into it.
As a house, Barton Cottage, though small, was comfortableand compact; but as a cottage it was defective, for thebuilding was regular, the roof was tiled, the windowshutters were not painted green, nor were the walls coveredwith honeysuckles.
A narrow passage led directly throughthe house into the garden behind.
On each side of theentrance was a sitting room, about sixteen feet square;and beyond them were the offices and the stairs.
Four bed-rooms and two garrets formed the rest of the house.
It had not been built many years and was in good repair.
In comparison of Norland, it was poor and small indeed!--butthe tears which recollection called forth as they enteredthe house were soon dried away.
They were cheeredby the joy of the servants on their arrival, and eachfor the sake of the others resolved to appear happy.
It was very early in September; the season was fine,and from first seeing the place under the advantageof good weather, they received an impression in itsfavour which was of material service in recommendingit to their lasting approbation.
The situation of the house was good.
High hills roseimmediately behind, and at no great distance on each side;some of which were open downs, the others cultivated and woody.
The village of Barton was chiefly on one of these hills,and formed a pleasant view from the cottage windows.
The prospect in front was more extensive; it commanded thewhole of the valley, and reached into the country beyond.
The hills which surrounded the cottage terminatedthe valley in that direction; under another name,and in another course, it branched out again between twoof the steepest of them.
With the size and furniture of the house Mrs. Dashwoodwas upon the whole well satisfied; for though her formerstyle of life rendered many additions to the latterindispensable, yet to add and improve was a delight to her;and she had at this time ready money enough to supply allthat was wanted of greater elegance to the apartments.
"As for the house itself, to be sure," said she, "it istoo small for our family, but we will make ourselvestolerably comfortable for the present, as it is too latein the year for improvements.
Perhaps in the spring,if I have plenty of money, as I dare say I shall, we maythink about building.
These parlors are both too smallfor such parties of our friends as I hope to see oftencollected here; and I have some thoughts of throwing thepassage into one of them with perhaps a part of the other,and so leave the remainder of that other for an entrance;this, with a new drawing room which may be easily added,and a bed-chamber and garret above, will make it a very snuglittle cottage.
I could wish the stairs were handsome.
But one must not expect every thing; though I suppose itwould be no difficult matter to widen them.
I shall seehow much I am before-hand with the world in the spring,and we will plan our improvements accordingly."
In the mean time, till all these alterations couldbe made from the savings of an income of five hundreda-year by a woman who never saved in her life, they werewise enough to be contented with the house as it was;and each of them was busy in arranging their particularconcerns, and endeavoring, by placing around them booksand other possessions, to form themselves a home.
Marianne's pianoforte was unpacked and properly disposed of;and Elinor's drawings were affixed to the walls of theirsitting room.
In such employments as these they were interruptedsoon after breakfast the next day by the entrance oftheir landlord, who called to welcome them to Barton,and to offer them every accommodation from his own houseand garden in which theirs might at present be deficient.
Sir John Middleton was a good looking man about forty.
He had formerly visited at Stanhill, but it was too longfor his young cousins to remember him.
His countenancewas thoroughly good-humoured; and his manners wereas friendly as the style of his letter.
Their arrivalseemed to afford him real satisfaction, and their comfortto be an object of real solicitude to him.
He said muchof his earnest desire of their living in the most sociableterms with his family, and pressed them so cordiallyto dine at Barton Park every day till they were bettersettled at home, that, though his entreaties were carriedto a point of perseverance beyond civility, they couldnot give offence.
His kindness was not confined to words;for within an hour after he left them, a large basketfull of garden stuff and fruit arrived from the park,which was followed before the end of the day by a presentof game.
He insisted, moreover, on conveying all theirletters to and from the post for them, and would not bedenied the satisfaction of sending them his newspaperevery day.
Lady Middleton had sent a very civil message by him,denoting her intention of waiting on Mrs. Dashwood as soon asshe could be assured that her visit would be no inconvenience;and as this message was answered by an invitationequally polite, her ladyship was introduced to them the next day.
They were, of course, very anxious to see a person onwhom so much of their comfort at Barton must depend; and theelegance of her appearance was favourable to their wishes.
Lady Middleton was not more than six or seven and twenty;her face was handsome, her figure tall and striking,and her address graceful.
Her manners had all the elegancewhich her husband's wanted.
But they would have beenimproved by some share of his frankness and warmth;and her visit was long enough to detract something fromtheir first admiration, by shewing that, though perfectlywell-bred, she was reserved, cold, and had nothing to sayfor herself beyond the most common-place inquiry or remark.
Conversation however was not wanted, for Sir Johnwas very chatty, and Lady Middleton had taken the wiseprecaution of bringing with her their eldest child, a finelittle boy about six years old, by which means there wasone subject always to be recurred to by the ladies in caseof extremity, for they had to enquire his name and age,admire his beauty, and ask him questions which his motheranswered for him, while he hung about her and helddown his head, to the great surprise of her ladyship,who wondered at his being so shy before company, as hecould make noise enough at home.
On every formal visita child ought to be of the party, by way of provisionfor discourse.
In the present case it took up ten minutesto determine whether the boy were most like his fatheror mother, and in what particular he resembled either,for of course every body differed, and every body wasastonished at the opinion of the others.
An opportunity was soon to be given to the Dashwoodsof debating on the rest of the children, as Sir Johnwould not leave the house without securing their promiseof dining at the park the next day.
CHAPTER 7Barton Park was about half a mile from the cottage.
The ladies had passed near it in their way along the valley,but it was screened from their view at home by theprojection of a hill.
The house was large and handsome;and the Middletons lived in a style of equal hospitalityand elegance.
The former was for Sir John's gratification,the latter for that of his lady.
They were scarcelyever without some friends staying with them in the house,and they kept more company of every kind than any otherfamily in the neighbourhood.
It was necessary to thehappiness of both; for however dissimilar in temperand outward behaviour, they strongly resembled each otherin that total want of talent and taste which confinedtheir employments, unconnected with such as society produced,within a very narrow compass.
Sir John was a sportsman,Lady Middleton a mother.
He hunted and shot, and shehumoured her children; and these were their only resources.
Lady Middleton had the advantage of being able to spoil herchildren all the year round, while Sir John's independentemployments were in existence only half the time.
Continual engagements at home and abroad, however,supplied all the deficiencies of nature and education;supported the good spirits of Sir John, and gave exerciseto the good breeding of his wife.
Lady Middleton piqued herself upon the eleganceof her table, and of all her domestic arrangements;and from this kind of vanity was her greatest enjoymentin any of their parties.
But Sir John's satisfactionin society was much more real; he delighted in collectingabout him more young people than his house would hold,and the noisier they were the better was he pleased.
He was a blessing to all the juvenile part of the neighbourhood,for in summer he was for ever forming parties to eat coldham and chicken out of doors, and in winter his privateballs were numerous enough for any young lady who was notsuffering under the unsatiable appetite of fifteen.
The arrival of a new family in the country was alwaysa matter of joy to him, and in every point of view he wascharmed with the inhabitants he had now procured for hiscottage at Barton.
The Miss Dashwoods were young, pretty,and unaffected.
It was enough to secure his good opinion;for to be unaffected was all that a pretty girl couldwant to make her mind as captivating as her person.
The friendliness of his disposition made him happy inaccommodating those, whose situation might be considered,in comparison with the past, as unfortunate.
In showingkindness to his cousins therefore he had the real satisfactionof a good heart; and in settling a family of females onlyin his cottage, he had all the satisfaction of a sportsman;for a sportsman, though he esteems only those of his sex whoare sportsmen likewise, is not often desirous of encouragingtheir taste by admitting them to a residence within his ownmanor.
Mrs. Dashwood and her daughters were met at the doorof the house by Sir John, who welcomed them to BartonPark with unaffected sincerity; and as he attended themto the drawing room repeated to the young ladies the concernwhich the same subject had drawn from him the day before,at being unable to get any smart young men to meet them.
They would see, he said, only one gentleman therebesides himself; a particular friend who was staying atthe park, but who was neither very young nor very gay.
He hoped they would all excuse the smallness of the party,and could assure them it should never happen so again.
He had been to several families that morning in hopesof procuring some addition to their number, but itwas moonlight and every body was full of engagements.
Luckily Lady Middleton's mother had arrived at Bartonwithin the last hour, and as she was a very cheerfulagreeable woman, he hoped the young ladies would not findit so very dull as they might imagine.
The young ladies,as well as their mother, were perfectly satisfied withhaving two entire strangers of the party, and wished forno more.
Mrs. Jennings, Lady Middleton's mother, was agood-humoured, merry, fat, elderly woman, who talked agreat deal, seemed very happy, and rather vulgar.
She was fullof jokes and laughter, and before dinner was over had saidmany witty things on the subject of lovers and husbands;hoped they had not left their hearts behind them in Sussex,and pretended to see them blush whether they did or not.
Marianne was vexed at it for her sister's sake, and turnedher eyes towards Elinor to see how she bore these attacks,with an earnestness which gave Elinor far more pain thancould arise from such common-place raillery as Mrs. Jennings's.
Colonel Brandon, the friend of Sir John, seemed nomore adapted by resemblance of manner to be his friend,than Lady Middleton was to be his wife, or Mrs. Jenningsto be Lady Middleton's mother.
He was silent and grave.
His appearance however was not unpleasing, in spiteof his being in the opinion of Marianne and Margaretan absolute old bachelor, for he was on the wrong sideof five and thirty; but though his face was not handsome,his countenance was sensible, and his address wasparticularly gentlemanlike.
There was nothing in any of the party which couldrecommend them as companions to the Dashwoods; but the coldinsipidity of Lady Middleton was so particularly repulsive,that in comparison of it the gravity of Colonel Brandon,and even the boisterous mirth of Sir John and hismother-in-law was interesting.
Lady Middleton seemedto be roused to enjoyment only by the entrance of herfour noisy children after dinner, who pulled her about,tore her clothes, and put an end to every kind of discourseexcept what related to themselves.
In the evening, as Marianne was discovered to be musical,she was invited to play.
The instrument was unlocked,every body prepared to be charmed, and Marianne,who sang very well, at their request went through thechief of the songs which Lady Middleton had brought intothe family on her marriage, and which perhaps had lainever since in the same position on the pianoforte,for her ladyship had celebrated that event by givingup music, although by her mother's account, she hadplayed extremely well, and by her own was very fond of it.
Marianne's performance was highly applauded.
Sir John was loud in his admiration at the end of every song,and as loud in his conversation with the others while everysong lasted.
Lady Middleton frequently called him to order,wondered how any one's attention could be diverted from musicfor a moment, and asked Marianne to sing a particular songwhich Marianne had just finished.
Colonel Brandon alone,of all the party, heard her without being in raptures.
He paid her only the compliment of attention; and she felta respect for him on the occasion, which the others hadreasonably forfeited by their shameless want of taste.
His pleasure in music, though it amounted not to thatecstatic delight which alone could sympathize with her own,was estimable when contrasted against the horribleinsensibility of the others; and she was reasonable enoughto allow that a man of five and thirty might well haveoutlived all acuteness of feeling and every exquisitepower of enjoyment.
She was perfectly disposed to makeevery allowance for the colonel's advanced state of lifewhich humanity required.
CHAPTER 8Mrs. Jennings was a widow with an ample jointure.
She had only two daughters, both of whom she had livedto see respectably married, and she had now thereforenothing to do but to marry all the rest of the world.
In the promotion of this object she was zealously active,as far as her ability reached; and missed no opportunityof projecting weddings among all the young peopleof her acquaintance.
She was remarkably quick in thediscovery of attachments, and had enjoyed the advantageof raising the blushes and the vanity of many a younglady by insinuations of her power over such a young man;and this kind of discernment enabled her soon after herarrival at Barton decisively to pronounce that ColonelBrandon was very much in love with Marianne Dashwood.
She rather suspected it to be so, on the very firstevening of their being together, from his listeningso attentively while she sang to them; and when the visitwas returned by the Middletons' dining at the cottage,the fact was ascertained by his listening to her again.
It must be so.
She was perfectly convinced of it.
It would be an excellent match, for HE was rich, and SHEwas handsome.
Mrs. Jennings had been anxious to seeColonel Brandon well married, ever since her connectionwith Sir John first brought him to her knowledge;and she was always anxious to get a good husband for everypretty girl.
The immediate advantage to herself was by no meansinconsiderable, for it supplied her with endless jokesagainst them both.
At the park she laughed at the colonel,and in the cottage at Marianne.
To the former herraillery was probably, as far as it regarded only himself,perfectly indifferent; but to the latter it was atfirst incomprehensible; and when its object was understood,she hardly knew whether most to laugh at its absurdity,or censure its impertinence, for she considered it as anunfeeling reflection on the colonel's advanced years,and on his forlorn condition as an old bachelor.
Mrs. Dashwood, who could not think a man five yearsyounger than herself, so exceedingly ancient as he appearedto the youthful fancy of her daughter, ventured to clearMrs. Jennings from the probability of wishing to throwridicule on his age.
"But at least, Mamma, you cannot deny the absurdityof the accusation, though you may not think it intentionallyill-natured.
Colonel Brandon is certainly younger thanMrs. Jennings, but he is old enough to be MY father;and if he were ever animated enough to be in love,must have long outlived every sensation of the kind.
It is too ridiculous!
When is a man to be safe from such wit,if age and infirmity will not protect him?"
"Infirmity!"
said Elinor, "do you call Colonel Brandoninfirm?
I can easily suppose that his age may appear muchgreater to you than to my mother; but you can hardlydeceive yourself as to his having the use of his limbs!"
"Did not you hear him complain of the rheumatism?
and is not that the commonest infirmity of declining life?"
"My dearest child," said her mother, laughing,"at this rate you must be in continual terror of MY decay;and it must seem to you a miracle that my life has beenextended to the advanced age of forty."
"Mamma, you are not doing me justice.
I know very wellthat Colonel Brandon is not old enough to make his friendsyet apprehensive of losing him in the course of nature.
He may live twenty years longer.
But thirty-five hasnothing to do with matrimony."
"Perhaps," said Elinor, "thirty-five and seventeen hadbetter not have any thing to do with matrimony together.
But if there should by any chance happen to be a womanwho is single at seven and twenty, I should not thinkColonel Brandon's being thirty-five any objection to hismarrying HER."
"A woman of seven and twenty," said Marianne,after pausing a moment, "can never hope to feel or inspireaffection again, and if her home be uncomfortable,or her fortune small, I can suppose that she mightbring herself to submit to the offices of a nurse,for the sake of the provision and security of a wife.
In his marrying such a woman therefore there would benothing unsuitable.
It would be a compact of convenience,and the world would be satisfied.
In my eyes it wouldbe no marriage at all, but that would be nothing.
To me it would seem only a commercial exchange, in whicheach wished to be benefited at the expense of the other."
"It would be impossible, I know," replied Elinor,"to convince you that a woman of seven and twenty couldfeel for a man of thirty-five anything near enoughto love, to make him a desirable companion to her.
But I must object to your dooming Colonel Brandon andhis wife to the constant confinement of a sick chamber,merely because he chanced to complain yesterday (avery cold damp day) of a slight rheumatic feel in oneof his shoulders."
"But he talked of flannel waistcoats," said Marianne;"and with me a flannel waistcoat is invariably connectedwith aches, cramps, rheumatisms, and every species ofailment that can afflict the old and the feeble."
"Had he been only in a violent fever, you would nothave despised him half so much.
Confess, Marianne, is notthere something interesting to you in the flushed cheek,hollow eye, and quick pulse of a fever?"
Soon after this, upon Elinor's leaving the room,"Mamma," said Marianne, "I have an alarm on the subjectof illness which I cannot conceal from you.
I am sureEdward Ferrars is not well.
We have now been here almosta fortnight, and yet he does not come.
Nothing but realindisposition could occasion this extraordinary delay.
What else can detain him at Norland?"
"Had you any idea of his coming so soon?"
said Mrs. Dashwood.
"I had none.
On the contrary,if I have felt any anxiety at all on the subject, it hasbeen in recollecting that he sometimes showed a wantof pleasure and readiness in accepting my invitation,when I talked of his coming to Barton.
Does Elinorexpect him already?"
"I have never mentioned it to her, but of courseshe must."
"I rather think you are mistaken, for when Iwas talking to her yesterday of getting a new gratefor the spare bedchamber, she observed that therewas no immediate hurry for it, as it was not likelythat the room would be wanted for some time."
"How strange this is!
what can be the meaning of it!
But the whole of their behaviour to each other has beenunaccountable!
How cold, how composed were their lastadieus!
How languid their conversation the last eveningof their being together!
In Edward's farewell there was nodistinction between Elinor and me: it was the good wishesof an affectionate brother to both.
Twice did I leavethem purposely together in the course of the last morning,and each time did he most unaccountably follow me outof the room.
And Elinor, in quitting Norland and Edward,cried not as I did.
Even now her self-command is invariable.
When is she dejected or melancholy?
When does she tryto avoid society, or appear restless and dissatisfiedin it?"
CHAPTER 9The Dashwoods were now settled at Barton with tolerablecomfort to themselves.
The house and the garden, with allthe objects surrounding them, were now become familiar,and the ordinary pursuits which had given to Norlandhalf its charms were engaged in again with far greaterenjoyment than Norland had been able to afford, since theloss of their father.
Sir John Middleton, who calledon them every day for the first fortnight, and who wasnot in the habit of seeing much occupation at home,could not conceal his amazement on finding them always employed.
Their visitors, except those from Barton Park,were not many; for, in spite of Sir John's urgent entreatiesthat they would mix more in the neighbourhood, and repeatedassurances of his carriage being always at their service,the independence of Mrs. Dashwood's spirit overcame thewish of society for her children; and she was resolutein declining to visit any family beyond the distanceof a walk.
There were but few who could be so classed;and it was not all of them that were attainable.
About a mile and a half from the cottage, along the narrowwinding valley of Allenham, which issued from that of Barton,as formerly described, the girls had, in one of theirearliest walks, discovered an ancient respectable lookingmansion which, by reminding them a little of Norland,interested their imagination and made them wish to bebetter acquainted with it.
But they learnt, on enquiry,that its possessor, an elderly lady of very good character,was unfortunately too infirm to mix with the world,and never stirred from home.
The whole country about them abounded in beautiful walks.
The high downs which invited them from almost every windowof the cottage to seek the exquisite enjoyment of airon their summits, were a happy alternative when the dirtof the valleys beneath shut up their superior beauties;and towards one of these hills did Marianne and Margaretone memorable morning direct their steps, attracted by thepartial sunshine of a showery sky, and unable longer to bearthe confinement which the settled rain of the two precedingdays had occasioned.
The weather was not tempting enoughto draw the two others from their pencil and their book,in spite of Marianne's declaration that the day wouldbe lastingly fair, and that every threatening cloud wouldbe drawn off from their hills; and the two girls set offtogether.
They gaily ascended the downs, rejoicing in their ownpenetration at every glimpse of blue sky; and when theycaught in their faces the animating gales of a highsouth-westerly wind, they pitied the fears which had preventedtheir mother and Elinor from sharing such delightful sensations.
"Is there a felicity in the world," said Marianne,"superior to this?--Margaret, we will walk here at leasttwo hours."
Margaret agreed, and they pursued their way againstthe wind, resisting it with laughing delight for abouttwenty minutes longer, when suddenly the clouds united overtheir heads, and a driving rain set full in their face.--Chagrined and surprised, they were obliged, though unwillingly,to turn back, for no shelter was nearer than their own house.
One consolation however remained for them, to which theexigence of the moment gave more than usual propriety;it was that of running with all possible speed down the steepside of the hill which led immediately to their garden gate.
They set off.
Marianne had at first the advantage,but a false step brought her suddenly to the ground;and Margaret, unable to stop herself to assist her,was involuntarily hurried along, and reached the bottomin safety.
A gentleman carrying a gun, with two pointersplaying round him, was passing up the hill and withina few yards of Marianne, when her accident happened.
He put down his gun and ran to her assistance.
She hadraised herself from the ground, but her foot had beentwisted in her fall, and she was scarcely able to stand.
The gentleman offered his services; and perceiving that hermodesty declined what her situation rendered necessary,took her up in his arms without farther delay, and carriedher down the hill.
Then passing through the garden,the gate of which had been left open by Margaret, he bore herdirectly into the house, whither Margaret was just arrived,and quitted not his hold till he had seated her in a chairin the parlour.
Elinor and her mother rose up in amazement attheir entrance, and while the eyes of both were fixedon him with an evident wonder and a secret admirationwhich equally sprung from his appearance, he apologizedfor his intrusion by relating its cause, in a mannerso frank and so graceful that his person, which wasuncommonly handsome, received additional charms from his voiceand expression.
Had he been even old, ugly, and vulgar,the gratitude and kindness of Mrs. Dashwood wouldhave been secured by any act of attention to her child;but the influence of youth, beauty, and elegance,gave an interest to the action which came home to her feelings.
She thanked him again and again; and, with a sweetnessof address which always attended her, invited him tobe seated.
But this he declined, as he was dirty and wet.
Mrs. Dashwood then begged to know to whom she was obliged.
His name, he replied, was Willoughby, and his presenthome was at Allenham, from whence he hoped she wouldallow him the honour of calling tomorrow to enquireafter Miss Dashwood.
The honour was readily granted,and he then departed, to make himself still more interesting,in the midst of a heavy rain.
His manly beauty and more than common gracefulnesswere instantly the theme of general admiration,and the laugh which his gallantry raised against Mariannereceived particular spirit from his exterior attractions.--Marianne herself had seen less of his person that the rest,for the confusion which crimsoned over her face, on hislifting her up, had robbed her of the power of regardinghim after their entering the house.
But she had seenenough of him to join in all the admiration of the others,and with an energy which always adorned her praise.
His person and air were equal to what her fancy had everdrawn for the hero of a favourite story; and in his carryingher into the house with so little previous formality, therewas a rapidity of thought which particularly recommendedthe action to her.
Every circumstance belonging to himwas interesting.
His name was good, his residence was intheir favourite village, and she soon found out that of allmanly dresses a shooting-jacket was the most becoming.
Her imagination was busy, her reflections were pleasant,and the pain of a sprained ankle was disregarded.
Sir John called on them as soon as the next intervalof fair weather that morning allowed him to get outof doors; and Marianne's accident being related to him,he was eagerly asked whether he knew any gentlemanof the name of Willoughby at Allenham.
"Willoughby!"
cried Sir John; "what, is HEin the country?
That is good news however; I willride over tomorrow, and ask him to dinner on Thursday."
"You know him then," said Mrs. Dashwood.
"Know him!
to be sure I do.
Why, he is down hereevery year."
"And what sort of a young man is he?"
"As good a kind of fellow as ever lived, I assure you.
A very decent shot, and there is not a bolder riderin England."
"And is that all you can say for him?"
cried Marianne,indignantly.
"But what are his manners on more intimateacquaintance?
What his pursuits, his talents, and genius?"
Sir John was rather puzzled.
"Upon my soul," said he, "I do not know much about himas to all THAT.
But he is a pleasant, good humoured fellow,and has got the nicest little black bitch of a pointerI ever saw.
Was she out with him today?"
But Marianne could no more satisfy him as to thecolour of Mr. Willoughby's pointer, than he coulddescribe to her the shades of his mind.
"But who is he?"
said Elinor.
"Where does he comefrom?
Has he a house at Allenham?"
On this point Sir John could give more certain intelligence;and he told them that Mr. Willoughby had no propertyof his own in the country; that he resided there onlywhile he was visiting the old lady at Allenham Court,to whom he was related, and whose possessions he wasto inherit; adding, "Yes, yes, he is very well worthcatching I can tell you, Miss Dashwood; he has a prettylittle estate of his own in Somersetshire besides;and if I were you, I would not give him up to myyounger sister, in spite of all this tumbling down hills.
Miss Marianne must not expect to have all the men to herself.
Brandon will be jealous, if she does not take care."
"I do not believe," said Mrs. Dashwood, with agood humoured smile, "that Mr. Willoughby will be incommodedby the attempts of either of MY daughters towards whatyou call CATCHING him.
It is not an employment to whichthey have been brought up.
Men are very safe with us,let them be ever so rich.
I am glad to find, however,from what you say, that he is a respectable young man,and one whose acquaintance will not be ineligible."
"He is as good a sort of fellow, I believe,as ever lived," repeated Sir John.
"I rememberlast Christmas at a little hop at the park, he dancedfrom eight o'clock till four, without once sitting down."
"Did he indeed?"
cried Marianne with sparkling eyes,"and with elegance, with spirit?"
"Yes; and he was up again at eight to ride to covert."
"That is what I like; that is what a young man oughtto be.
Whatever be his pursuits, his eagerness in themshould know no moderation, and leave him no sense of fatigue."
"Aye, aye, I see how it will be," said Sir John, "I seehow it will be.
You will be setting your cap at him now,and never think of poor Brandon."
"That is an expression, Sir John," said Marianne,warmly, "which I particularly dislike.
I abhor everycommon-place phrase by which wit is intended; and 'settingone's cap at a man,' or 'making a conquest,' are the mostodious of all.
Their tendency is gross and illiberal;and if their construction could ever be deemed clever,time has long ago destroyed all its ingenuity."
Sir John did not much understand this reproof;but he laughed as heartily as if he did, and then replied,"Ay, you will make conquests enough, I dare say,one way or other.
Poor Brandon!
he is quite smitten already,and he is very well worth setting your cap at, I cantell you, in spite of all this tumbling about and sprainingof ankles."
CHAPTER 10Marianne's preserver, as Margaret, with more elegancethan precision, styled Willoughby, called at the cottageearly the next morning to make his personal enquiries.
He was received by Mrs. Dashwood with more than politeness;with a kindness which Sir John's account of him and her owngratitude prompted; and every thing that passed duringthe visit tended to assure him of the sense, elegance,mutual affection, and domestic comfort of the familyto whom accident had now introduced him.
Of theirpersonal charms he had not required a second interviewto be convinced.
Miss Dashwood had a delicate complexion,regular features, and a remarkably pretty figure.
Marianne was still handsomer.
Her form, though not socorrect as her sister's, in having the advantage of height,was more striking; and her face was so lovely, that whenin the common cant of praise, she was called a beautiful girl,truth was less violently outraged than usually happens.
Her skin was very brown, but, from its transparency,her complexion was uncommonly brilliant; her featureswere all good; her smile was sweet and attractive;and in her eyes, which were very dark, there was a life,a spirit, an eagerness, which could hardily be seenwithout delight.
From Willoughby their expression was atfirst held back, by the embarrassment which the remembranceof his assistance created.
But when this passed away,when her spirits became collected, when she saw that to theperfect good-breeding of the gentleman, he united franknessand vivacity, and above all, when she heard him declare,that of music and dancing he was passionately fond,she gave him such a look of approbation as secured thelargest share of his discourse to herself for the restof his stay.
It was only necessary to mention any favouriteamusement to engage her to talk.
She could not besilent when such points were introduced, and shehad neither shyness nor reserve in their discussion.
They speedily discovered that their enjoyment of dancingand music was mutual, and that it arose from a generalconformity of judgment in all that related to either.
Encouraged by this to a further examination of his opinions,she proceeded to question him on the subject of books;her favourite authors were brought forward and dweltupon with so rapturous a delight, that any young man offive and twenty must have been insensible indeed, not tobecome an immediate convert to the excellence of such works,however disregarded before.
Their taste was strikingly alike.
The same books, the same passages were idolized by each--or if any difference appeared, any objection arose,it lasted no longer than till the force of her argumentsand the brightness of her eyes could be displayed.
He acquiesced in all her decisions, caught all her enthusiasm;and long before his visit concluded, they conversedwith the familiarity of a long-established acquaintance.
"Well, Marianne," said Elinor, as soon as he had left them,"for ONE morning I think you have done pretty well.
You have already ascertained Mr. Willoughby's opinion inalmost every matter of importance.
You know what he thinksof Cowper and Scott; you are certain of his estimatingtheir beauties as he ought, and you have received everyassurance of his admiring Pope no more than is proper.
But how is your acquaintance to be long supported, under suchextraordinary despatch of every subject for discourse?
You will soon have exhausted each favourite topic.
Another meeting will suffice to explain his sentimentson picturesque beauty, and second marriages, and thenyou can have nothing farther to ask."
--"Elinor," cried Marianne, "is this fair?
is thisjust?
are my ideas so scanty?
But I see what you mean.
I have been too much at my ease, too happy, too frank.
I have erred against every common-place notion of decorum;I have been open and sincere where I ought to havebeen reserved, spiritless, dull, and deceitful--hadI talked only of the weather and the roads, and had Ispoken only once in ten minutes, this reproach would havebeen spared."
"My love," said her mother, "you must not be offendedwith Elinor--she was only in jest.
I should scoldher myself, if she were capable of wishing to checkthe delight of your conversation with our new friend."
--Marianne was softened in a moment.
Willoughby, on his side, gave every proof of hispleasure in their acquaintance, which an evident wishof improving it could offer.
He came to them every day.
To enquire after Marianne was at first his excuse; but theencouragement of his reception, to which every day gavegreater kindness, made such an excuse unnecessary before ithad ceased to be possible, by Marianne's perfect recovery.
She was confined for some days to the house; but never hadany confinement been less irksome.
Willoughby was a youngman of good abilities, quick imagination, lively spirits,and open, affectionate manners.
He was exactly formedto engage Marianne's heart, for with all this, he joinednot only a captivating person, but a natural ardourof mind which was now roused and increased by the exampleof her own, and which recommended him to her affectionbeyond every thing else.
His society became gradually her most exquisite enjoyment.
They read, they talked, they sang together; his musicaltalents were considerable; and he read with all thesensibility and spirit which Edward had unfortunately wanted.
In Mrs. Dashwood's estimation he was as faultlessas in Marianne's; and Elinor saw nothing to censure in himbut a propensity, in which he strongly resembled and peculiarlydelighted her sister, of saying too much what he thought onevery occasion, without attention to persons or circumstances.
In hastily forming and giving his opinion of other people,in sacrificing general politeness to the enjoymentof undivided attention where his heart was engaged,and in slighting too easily the forms of worldly propriety,he displayed a want of caution which Elinor could not approve,in spite of all that he and Marianne could say in its support.
Marianne began now to perceive that the desperationwhich had seized her at sixteen and a half, of everseeing a man who could satisfy her ideas of perfection,had been rash and unjustifiable.
Willoughby was allthat her fancy had delineated in that unhappy hourand in every brighter period, as capable of attaching her;and his behaviour declared his wishes to be in that respectas earnest, as his abilities were strong.
Her mother too, in whose mind not one speculativethought of their marriage had been raised, by his prospectof riches, was led before the end of a week to hope andexpect it; and secretly to congratulate herself on havinggained two such sons-in-law as Edward and Willoughby.
Colonel Brandon's partiality for Marianne, which hadso early been discovered by his friends, now first becameperceptible to Elinor, when it ceased to be noticedby them.
Their attention and wit were drawn off to hismore fortunate rival; and the raillery which the otherhad incurred before any partiality arose, was removedwhen his feelings began really to call for the ridiculeso justly annexed to sensibility.
Elinor was obliged,though unwillingly, to believe that the sentiments whichMrs. Jennings had assigned him for her own satisfaction,were now actually excited by her sister; and that howevera general resemblance of disposition between the partiesmight forward the affection of Mr. Willoughby, an equallystriking opposition of character was no hindrance to theregard of Colonel Brandon.
She saw it with concern;for what could a silent man of five and thirty hope,when opposed to a very lively one of five and twenty?
and asshe could not even wish him successful, she heartily wishedhim indifferent.
She liked him--in spite of his gravityand reserve, she beheld in him an object of interest.
His manners, though serious, were mild; and his reserveappeared rather the result of some oppression of spiritsthan of any natural gloominess of temper.
Sir Johnhad dropped hints of past injuries and disappointments,which justified her belief of his being an unfortunate man,and she regarded him with respect and compassion.
Perhaps she pitied and esteemed him the morebecause he was slighted by Willoughby and Marianne,who, prejudiced against him for being neither livelynor young, seemed resolved to undervalue his merits.
"Brandon is just the kind of man," said Willoughbyone day, when they were talking of him together,"whom every body speaks well of, and nobody cares about;whom all are delighted to see, and nobody remembersto talk to."
"That is exactly what I think of him," cried Marianne.
"Do not boast of it, however," said Elinor, "for itis injustice in both of you.
He is highly esteemedby all the family at the park, and I never see him myselfwithout taking pains to converse with him."
"That he is patronised by YOU," replied Willoughby,"is certainly in his favour; but as for the esteemof the others, it is a reproach in itself.
Who wouldsubmit to the indignity of being approved by such a womanas Lady Middleton and Mrs. Jennings, that could commandthe indifference of any body else?"
"But perhaps the abuse of such people as yourselfand Marianne will make amends for the regard of LadyMiddleton and her mother.
If their praise is censure,your censure may be praise, for they are not more undiscerning,than you are prejudiced and unjust."
"In defence of your protege you can even be saucy."
"My protege, as you call him, is a sensible man;and sense will always have attractions for me.
Yes, Marianne, even in a man between thirty and forty.
He has seen a great deal of the world; has been abroad,has read, and has a thinking mind.
I have found himcapable of giving me much information on various subjects;and he has always answered my inquiries with readiness ofgood-breeding and good nature."
"That is to say," cried Marianne contemptuously,"he has told you, that in the East Indies the climate is hot,and the mosquitoes are troublesome."
"He WOULD have told me so, I doubt not, had I madeany such inquiries, but they happened to be pointson which I had been previously informed."
"Perhaps," said Willoughby, "his observations mayhave extended to the existence of nabobs, gold mohrs,and palanquins."
"I may venture to say that HIS observationshave stretched much further than your candour.
But why should you dislike him?"
"I do not dislike him.
I consider him, on the contrary,as a very respectable man, who has every body's good word,and nobody's notice; who, has more money than he can spend,more time than he knows how to employ, and two new coatsevery year."
"Add to which," cried Marianne, "that he hasneither genius, taste, nor spirit.
That his understandinghas no brilliancy, his feelings no ardour, and his voiceno expression."
"You decide on his imperfections so much in the mass,"replied Elinor, "and so much on the strength of yourown imagination, that the commendation I am able to giveof him is comparatively cold and insipid.
I can onlypronounce him to be a sensible man, well-bred, well-informed,of gentle address, and, I believe, possessing an amiable heart."
"Miss Dashwood," cried Willoughby, "you are now usingme unkindly.
You are endeavouring to disarm me by reason,and to convince me against my will.
But it will not do.
You shall find me as stubborn as you can be artful.
I havethree unanswerable reasons for disliking Colonel Brandon;he threatened me with rain when I wanted it to be fine;he has found fault with the hanging of my curricle,and I cannot persuade him to buy my brown mare.
If itwill be any satisfaction to you, however, to be told,that I believe his character to be in other respectsirreproachable, I am ready to confess it.
And in returnfor an acknowledgment, which must give me some pain,you cannot deny me the privilege of disliking him as muchas ever."
CHAPTER 11Little had Mrs. Dashwood or her daughters imaginedwhen they first came into Devonshire, that so manyengagements would arise to occupy their time as shortlypresented themselves, or that they should have such frequentinvitations and such constant visitors as to leave them littleleisure for serious employment.
Yet such was the case.
When Marianne was recovered, the schemes of amusement at homeand abroad, which Sir John had been previously forming,were put into execution.
The private balls at the parkthen began; and parties on the water were made andaccomplished as often as a showery October would allow.
In every meeting of the kind Willoughby was included;and the ease and familiarity which naturally attendedthese parties were exactly calculated to give increasingintimacy to his acquaintance with the Dashwoods, to affordhim opportunity of witnessing the excellencies of Marianne,of marking his animated admiration of her, and of receiving,in her behaviour to himself, the most pointed assuranceof her affection.
Elinor could not be surprised at their attachment.
She only wished that it were less openly shewn; and onceor twice did venture to suggest the propriety of someself-command to Marianne.
But Marianne abhorred allconcealment where no real disgrace could attend unreserve;and to aim at the restraint of sentiments which were notin themselves illaudable, appeared to her not merelyan unnecessary effort, but a disgraceful subjectionof reason to common-place and mistaken notions.
Willoughby thought the same; and their behaviour atall times, was an illustration of their opinions.
When he was present she had no eyes for any one else.
Every thing he did, was right.
Every thing he said, was clever.
If their evenings at the park were concluded with cards,he cheated himself and all the rest of the party to gether a good hand.
If dancing formed the amusementof the night, they were partners for half the time;and when obliged to separate for a couple of dances,were careful to stand together and scarcely spoke a wordto any body else.
Such conduct made them of coursemost exceedingly laughed at; but ridicule could not shame,and seemed hardly to provoke them.
Mrs. Dashwood entered into all their feelings witha warmth which left her no inclination for checking thisexcessive display of them.
To her it was but the naturalconsequence of a strong affection in a young and ardent mind.
This was the season of happiness to Marianne.
Her heart was devoted to Willoughby, and the fond attachmentto Norland, which she brought with her from Sussex,was more likely to be softened than she had thought itpossible before, by the charms which his society bestowedon her present home.
Elinor's happiness was not so great.
Her heart was notso much at ease, nor her satisfaction in their amusementsso pure.
They afforded her no companion that could makeamends for what she had left behind, nor that could teachher to think of Norland with less regret than ever.
Neither Lady Middleton nor Mrs. Jennings could supplyto her the conversation she missed; although the latterwas an everlasting talker, and from the first had regardedher with a kindness which ensured her a large share ofher discourse.
She had already repeated her own historyto Elinor three or four times; and had Elinor's memory beenequal to her means of improvement, she might have knownvery early in their acquaintance all the particulars ofMr. Jenning's last illness, and what he said to his wifea few minutes before he died.
Lady Middleton was moreagreeable than her mother only in being more silent.
Elinor needed little observation to perceive that herreserve was a mere calmness of manner with which sensehad nothing to do.
Towards her husband and mother shewas the same as to them; and intimacy was thereforeneither to be looked for nor desired.
She had nothingto say one day that she had not said the day before.
Her insipidity was invariable, for even her spirits werealways the same; and though she did not oppose the partiesarranged by her husband, provided every thing were conductedin style and her two eldest children attended her,she never appeared to receive more enjoyment from themthan she might have experienced in sitting at home;--and so little did her presence add to the pleasureof the others, by any share in their conversation,that they were sometimes only reminded of her beingamongst them by her solicitude about her troublesome boys.
In Colonel Brandon alone, of all her new acquaintance,did Elinor find a person who could in any degree claim therespect of abilities, excite the interest of friendship,or give pleasure as a companion.
Willoughby was outof the question.
Her admiration and regard, even hersisterly regard, was all his own; but he was a lover;his attentions were wholly Marianne's, and a far lessagreeable man might have been more generally pleasing.
Colonel Brandon, unfortunately for himself, had no suchencouragement to think only of Marianne, and in conversingwith Elinor he found the greatest consolation for theindifference of her sister.
Elinor's compassion for him increased, as she had reasonto suspect that the misery of disappointed love had alreadybeen known to him.
This suspicion was given by some wordswhich accidently dropped from him one evening at the park,when they were sitting down together by mutual consent,while the others were dancing.
His eyes were fixedon Marianne, and, after a silence of some minutes,he said, with a faint smile, "Your sister, I understand,does not approve of second attachments."
"No," replied Elinor, "her opinions are all romantic."
"Or rather, as I believe, she considers themimpossible to exist."
"I believe she does.
But how she contrives itwithout reflecting on the character of her own father,who had himself two wives, I know not.
A few yearshowever will settle her opinions on the reasonable basisof common sense and observation; and then they may bemore easy to define and to justify than they now are,by any body but herself."
"This will probably be the case," he replied;"and yet there is something so amiable in the prejudicesof a young mind, that one is sorry to see them give wayto the reception of more general opinions."
"I cannot agree with you there," said Elinor.
"There are inconveniences attending such feelingsas Marianne's, which all the charms of enthusiasm andignorance of the world cannot atone for.
Her systems haveall the unfortunate tendency of setting propriety at nought;and a better acquaintance with the world is what I lookforward to as her greatest possible advantage."
After a short pause he resumed the conversationby saying,--"Does your sister make no distinction in her objectionsagainst a second attachment?
or is it equally criminalin every body?
Are those who have been disappointedin their first choice, whether from the inconstancyof its object, or the perverseness of circumstances,to be equally indifferent during the rest of their lives?"
"Upon my word, I am not acquainted with the minutiaeof her principles.
I only know that I never yet heard heradmit any instance of a second attachment's being pardonable."
"This," said he, "cannot hold; but a change,a total change of sentiments--No, no, do not desire it;for when the romantic refinements of a young mindare obliged to give way, how frequently are theysucceeded by such opinions as are but too common, and toodangerous!
I speak from experience.
I once knew a ladywho in temper and mind greatly resembled your sister,who thought and judged like her, but who from an inforcedchange--from a series of unfortunate circumstances"--Here he stopt suddenly; appeared to think that he had saidtoo much, and by his countenance gave rise to conjectures,which might not otherwise have entered Elinor's head.
The lady would probably have passed without suspicion,had he not convinced Miss Dashwood that what concernedher ought not to escape his lips.
As it was,it required but a slight effort of fancy to connect hisemotion with the tender recollection of past regard.
Elinor attempted no more.
But Marianne, in her place,would not have done so little.
The whole story wouldhave been speedily formed under her active imagination;and every thing established in the most melancholy orderof disastrous love.
CHAPTER 12As Elinor and Marianne were walking together thenext morning the latter communicated a piece of newsto her sister, which in spite of all that she knewbefore of Marianne's imprudence and want of thought,surprised her by its extravagant testimony of both.
Marianne told her, with the greatest delight, thatWilloughby had given her a horse, one that he had bredhimself on his estate in Somersetshire, and which wasexactly calculated to carry a woman.
Without consideringthat it was not in her mother's plan to keep any horse,that if she were to alter her resolution in favour ofthis gift, she must buy another for the servant, andkeep a servant to ride it, and after all, build a stableto receive them, she had accepted the present withouthesitation, and told her sister of it in raptures.
"He intends to send his groom into Somersetshireimmediately for it," she added, "and when it arrives wewill ride every day.
You shall share its use with me.
Imagine to yourself, my dear Elinor, the delight of a gallopon some of these downs."
Most unwilling was she to awaken from such a dream offelicity to comprehend all the unhappy truths which attendedthe affair; and for some time she refused to submit to them.
As to an additional servant, the expense would be a trifle;Mamma she was sure would never object to it; and any horsewould do for HIM; he might always get one at the park;as to a stable, the merest shed would be sufficient.
Elinor then ventured to doubt the propriety of her receivingsuch a present from a man so little, or at least so latelyknown to her.
This was too much.
"You are mistaken, Elinor," said she warmly,"in supposing I know very little of Willoughby.
I have not known him long indeed, but I am much betteracquainted with him, than I am with any other creaturein the world, except yourself and mama.
It is nottime or opportunity that is to determine intimacy;--it is disposition alone.
Seven years would be insufficientto make some people acquainted with each other, and sevendays are more than enough for others.
I should holdmyself guilty of greater impropriety in accepting a horsefrom my brother, than from Willoughby.
Of John I knowvery little, though we have lived together for years;but of Willoughby my judgment has long been formed."
Elinor thought it wisest to touch that point no more.
She knew her sister's temper.
Opposition on so tender asubject would only attach her the more to her own opinion.
But by an appeal to her affection for her mother,by representing the inconveniences which that indulgentmother must draw on herself, if (as would probably bethe case) she consented to this increase of establishment,Marianne was shortly subdued; and she promised not totempt her mother to such imprudent kindness by mentioningthe offer, and to tell Willoughby when she saw him next,that it must be declined.
She was faithful to her word; and when Willoughbycalled at the cottage, the same day, Elinor heard herexpress her disappointment to him in a low voice, onbeing obliged to forego the acceptance of his present.
The reasons for this alteration were at the same time related,and they were such as to make further entreaty on hisside impossible.
His concern however was very apparent;and after expressing it with earnestness, he added,in the same low voice,--"But, Marianne, the horse isstill yours, though you cannot use it now.
I shall keepit only till you can claim it.
When you leave Bartonto form your own establishment in a more lasting home,Queen Mab shall receive you."
This was all overheard by Miss Dashwood; and in thewhole of the sentence, in his manner of pronouncing it,and in his addressing her sister by her Christian name alone,she instantly saw an intimacy so decided, a meaningso direct, as marked a perfect agreement between them.
From that moment she doubted not of their being engagedto each other; and the belief of it created no other surprisethan that she, or any of their friends, should be leftby tempers so frank, to discover it by accident.
Margaret related something to her the next day,which placed this matter in a still clearer light.
Willoughby had spent the preceding evening with them,and Margaret, by being left some time in the parlourwith only him and Marianne, had had opportunityfor observations, which, with a most important face,she communicated to her eldest sister, when they werenext by themselves.
"Oh, Elinor!"
she cried, "I have such a secret totell you about Marianne.
I am sure she will be marriedto Mr. Willoughby very soon."
"You have said so," replied Elinor, "almost everyday since they first met on High-church Down; and theyhad not known each other a week, I believe, before youwere certain that Marianne wore his picture round her neck;but it turned out to be only the miniature of our great uncle."
"But indeed this is quite another thing.
I am surethey will be married very soon, for he has got a lockof her hair."
"Take care, Margaret.
It may be only the hairof some great uncle of HIS."
"But, indeed, Elinor, it is Marianne's.
I am almostsure it is, for I saw him cut it off.
Last nightafter tea, when you and mama went out of the room,they were whispering and talking together as fast ascould be, and he seemed to be begging something of her,and presently he took up her scissors and cut off a longlock of her hair, for it was all tumbled down her back;and he kissed it, and folded it up in a piece of white paper;and put it into his pocket-book."
For such particulars, stated on such authority,Elinor could not withhold her credit; nor was she disposedto it, for the circumstance was in perfect unison withwhat she had heard and seen herself.
Margaret's sagacity was not always displayed in away so satisfactory to her sister.
When Mrs. Jenningsattacked her one evening at the park, to give the nameof the young man who was Elinor's particular favourite,which had been long a matter of great curiosity to her,Margaret answered by looking at her sister, and saying,"I must not tell, may I, Elinor?"
This of course made every body laugh; and Elinortried to laugh too.
But the effort was painful.
She was convinced that Margaret had fixed on a personwhose name she could not bear with composure to becomea standing joke with Mrs. Jennings.
Marianne felt for her most sincerely; but she didmore harm than good to the cause, by turning very redand saying in an angry manner to Margaret,"Remember that whatever your conjectures may be,you have no right to repeat them."
"I never had any conjectures about it," replied Margaret;"it was you who told me of it yourself."
This increased the mirth of the company, and Margaretwas eagerly pressed to say something more.
"Oh!
pray, Miss Margaret, let us know all about it,"said Mrs. Jennings.
"What is the gentleman's name?"
"I must not tell, ma'am.
But I know very well what it is;and I know where he is too."
"Yes, yes, we can guess where he is; at his own houseat Norland to be sure.
He is the curate of the parishI dare say."
"No, THAT he is not.
He is of no profession at all."
"Margaret," said Marianne with great warmth,"you know that all this is an invention of your own,and that there is no such person in existence."
"Well, then, he is lately dead, Marianne, for Iam sure there was such a man once, and his name beginswith an F."Most grateful did Elinor feel to Lady Middletonfor observing, at this moment, "that it rained very hard,"though she believed the interruption to proceed less fromany attention to her, than from her ladyship's great dislikeof all such inelegant subjects of raillery as delightedher husband and mother.
The idea however started by her,was immediately pursued by Colonel Brandon, who wason every occasion mindful of the feelings of others;and much was said on the subject of rain by both of them.
Willoughby opened the piano-forte, and asked Marianneto sit down to it; and thus amidst the various endeavoursof different people to quit the topic, it fell to the ground.
But not so easily did Elinor recover from the alarm intowhich it had thrown her.
A party was formed this evening for going on thefollowing day to see a very fine place about twelve milesfrom Barton, belonging to a brother-in-law of Colonel Brandon,without whose interest it could not be seen, as the proprietor,who was then abroad, had left strict orders on that head.
The grounds were declared to be highly beautiful,and Sir John, who was particularly warm in their praise,might be allowed to be a tolerable judge, for he hadformed parties to visit them, at least, twice every summerfor the last ten years.
They contained a noble pieceof water; a sail on which was to a form a great part ofthe morning's amusement; cold provisions were to be taken,open carriages only to be employed, and every thingconducted in the usual style of a complete party of pleasure.
To some few of the company it appeared rathera bold undertaking, considering the time of year,and that it had rained every day for the last fortnight;--and Mrs. Dashwood, who had already a cold, was persuadedby Elinor to stay at home.
CHAPTER 13Their intended excursion to Whitwell turned outvery different from what Elinor had expected.
She wasprepared to be wet through, fatigued, and frightened;but the event was still more unfortunate, for they didnot go at all.
By ten o'clock the whole party was assembled atthe park, where they were to breakfast.
The morningwas rather favourable, though it had rained all night,as the clouds were then dispersing across the sky,and the sun frequently appeared.
They were all in highspirits and good humour, eager to be happy, and determinedto submit to the greatest inconveniences and hardshipsrather than be otherwise.
While they were at breakfast the letters were brought in.
Among the rest there was one for Colonel Brandon;--hetook it, looked at the direction, changed colour,and immediately left the room.
"What is the matter with Brandon?"
said Sir John.
Nobody could tell.
"I hope he has had no bad news," said Lady Middleton.
"It must be something extraordinary that could make ColonelBrandon leave my breakfast table so suddenly."
In about five minutes he returned.
"No bad news, Colonel, I hope;" said Mrs. Jennings,as soon as he entered the room.
"None at all, ma'am, I thank you."
"Was it from Avignon?
I hope it is not to saythat your sister is worse."
"No, ma'am.
It came from town, and is merelya letter of business."
"But how came the hand to discompose you so much,if it was only a letter of business?
Come, come,this won't do, Colonel; so let us hear the truth of it."
"My dear madam," said Lady Middleton, "recollect whatyou are saying."
"Perhaps it is to tell you that your cousin Fannyis married?"
said Mrs. Jennings, without attendingto her daughter's reproof.
"No, indeed, it is not."
"Well, then, I know who it is from, Colonel.
And Ihope she is well."
"Whom do you mean, ma'am?"
said he, colouring a little.
"Oh!
you know who I mean."
"I am particularly sorry, ma'am," said he,addressing Lady Middleton, "that I should receive thisletter today, for it is on business which requiresmy immediate attendance in town."
"In town!"
cried Mrs. Jennings.
"What can youhave to do in town at this time of year?"
"My own loss is great," be continued, "in being obligedto leave so agreeable a party; but I am the more concerned,as I fear my presence is necessary to gain your admittanceat Whitwell."
What a blow upon them all was this!
"But if you write a note to the housekeeper, Mr. Brandon,"said Marianne, eagerly, "will it not be sufficient?"
He shook his head.
"We must go," said Sir John.--"It shall not be putoff when we are so near it.
You cannot go to town tilltomorrow, Brandon, that is all."
"I wish it could be so easily settled.
But itis not in my power to delay my journey for one day!"
"If you would but let us know what your business is,"said Mrs. Jennings, "we might see whether it could be putoff or not."
"You would not be six hours later," said Willoughby,"if you were to defer your journey till our return."
"I cannot afford to lose ONE hour."
--Elinor then heard Willoughby say, in a low voice to Marianne,"There are some people who cannot bear a party of pleasure.
Brandon is one of them.
He was afraid of catching coldI dare say, and invented this trick for getting out of it.
I would lay fifty guineas the letter was of his own writing."
"I have no doubt of it," replied Marianne.
"There is no persuading you to change your mind,Brandon, I know of old," said Sir John, "when once youare determined on anything.
But, however, I hope youwill think better of it.
Consider, here are the two MissCareys come over from Newton, the three Miss Dashwoodswalked up from the cottage, and Mr. Willoughby got uptwo hours before his usual time, on purpose to go to Whitwell."
Colonel Brandon again repeated his sorrow at beingthe cause of disappointing the party; but at the sametime declared it to be unavoidable.
"Well, then, when will you come back again?"
"I hope we shall see you at Barton," added her ladyship,"as soon as you can conveniently leave town; and we mustput off the party to Whitwell till you return."
"You are very obliging.
But it is so uncertain,when I may have it in my power to return, that I darenot engage for it at all."
"Oh!
he must and shall come back," cried Sir John.
"If he is not here by the end of the week, I shall goafter him."
"Ay, so do, Sir John," cried Mrs. Jennings, "and thenperhaps you may find out what his business is."
"I do not want to pry into other men's concerns.
I suppose it is something he is ashamed of."
Colonel Brandon's horses were announced.
"You do not go to town on horseback, do you?"
added Sir John.
"No.
Only to Honiton.
I shall then go post."
"Well, as you are resolved to go, I wish youa good journey.
But you had better change your mind."
"I assure you it is not in my power."
He then took leave of the whole party.
"Is there no chance of my seeing you and your sistersin town this winter, Miss Dashwood?"
"I am afraid, none at all."
"Then I must bid you farewell for a longer timethan I should wish to do."
To Marianne, he merely bowed and said nothing.
"Come Colonel," said Mrs. Jennings, "before you go,do let us know what you are going about."
He wished her a good morning, and, attended by Sir John,left the room.
The complaints and lamentations which politenesshad hitherto restrained, now burst forth universally;and they all agreed again and again how provoking it wasto be so disappointed.
"I can guess what his business is, however,"said Mrs. Jennings exultingly.
"Can you, ma'am?"
said almost every body.
"Yes; it is about Miss Williams, I am sure."
"And who is Miss Williams?"
asked Marianne.
"What!
do not you know who Miss Williams is?
I amsure you must have heard of her before.
She is a relationof the Colonel's, my dear; a very near relation.
We willnot say how near, for fear of shocking the young ladies."
Then, lowering her voice a little, she said to Elinor,"She is his natural daughter."
"Indeed!"
"Oh, yes; and as like him as she can stare.
I dare say the Colonel will leave her all his fortune."
When Sir John returned, he joined most heartilyin the general regret on so unfortunate an event;concluding however by observing, that as they wereall got together, they must do something by way ofbeing happy; and after some consultation it was agreed,that although happiness could only be enjoyed at Whitwell,they might procure a tolerable composure of mind by drivingabout the country.
The carriages were then ordered;Willoughby's was first, and Marianne never lookedhappier than when she got into it.
He drove throughthe park very fast, and they were soon out of sight;and nothing more of them was seen till their return,which did not happen till after the return of all the rest.
They both seemed delighted with their drive; but saidonly in general terms that they had kept in the lanes,while the others went on the downs.
It was settled that there should be a dance in the evening,and that every body should be extremely merry all day long.
Some more of the Careys came to dinner, and they had thepleasure of sitting down nearly twenty to table, which SirJohn observed with great contentment.
Willoughby tookhis usual place between the two elder Miss Dashwoods.
Mrs. Jennings sat on Elinor's right hand; and they had notbeen long seated, before she leant behind her and Willoughby,and said to Marianne, loud enough for them both to hear,"I have found you out in spite of all your tricks.
I know where you spent the morning."
Marianne coloured, and replied very hastily,"Where, pray?"
--"Did not you know," said Willoughby, "that we hadbeen out in my curricle?"
"Yes, yes, Mr. Impudence, I know that very well,and I was determined to find out WHERE you had been to.--I hope you like your house, Miss Marianne.
It is a verylarge one, I know; and when I come to see you, I hope youwill have new-furnished it, for it wanted it very muchwhen I was there six years ago."
Marianne turned away in great confusion.
Mrs. Jennings laughed heartily; and Elinor found that in herresolution to know where they had been, she had actuallymade her own woman enquire of Mr. Willoughby's groom;and that she had by that method been informed that theyhad gone to Allenham, and spent a considerable time therein walking about the garden and going all over the house.
Elinor could hardly believe this to be true,as it seemed very unlikely that Willoughby should propose,or Marianne consent, to enter the house while Mrs. Smith wasin it, with whom Marianne had not the smallest acquaintance.
As soon as they left the dining-room, Elinor enquiredof her about it; and great was her surprise when shefound that every circumstance related by Mrs. Jenningswas perfectly true.
Marianne was quite angry with herfor doubting it.
"Why should you imagine, Elinor, that we did notgo there, or that we did not see the house?
Is not itwhat you have often wished to do yourself?"
"Yes, Marianne, but I would not go while Mrs. Smithwas there, and with no other companion than Mr.
Willoughby."
"Mr. Willoughby however is the only person who canhave a right to shew that house; and as he went in an opencarriage, it was impossible to have any other companion.
I never spent a pleasanter morning in my life."
"I am afraid," replied Elinor, "that the pleasantnessof an employment does not always evince its propriety."
"On the contrary, nothing can be a stronger proofof it, Elinor; for if there had been any real improprietyin what I did, I should have been sensible of it atthe time, for we always know when we are acting wrong,and with such a conviction I could have had no pleasure."
"But, my dear Marianne, as it has already exposed youto some very impertinent remarks, do you not now beginto doubt the discretion of your own conduct?"
"If the impertinent remarks of Mrs. Jennings areto be the proof of impropriety in conduct, we are alloffending every moment of our lives.
I value not hercensure any more than I should do her commendation.
I am not sensible of having done anything wrong in walkingover Mrs. Smith's grounds, or in seeing her house.
They will one day be Mr. Willoughby's, and--""If they were one day to be your own, Marianne,you would not be justified in what you have done."
She blushed at this hint; but it was even visiblygratifying to her; and after a ten minutes' interval ofearnest thought, she came to her sister again, and saidwith great good humour, "Perhaps, Elinor, it WAS ratherill-judged in me to go to Allenham; but Mr. Willoughby wantedparticularly to shew me the place; and it is a charming house,I assure you.--There is one remarkably pretty sitting roomup stairs; of a nice comfortable size for constant use,and with modern furniture it would be delightful.
It is a corner room, and has windows on two sides.
On one side you look across the bowling-green, behindthe house, to a beautiful hanging wood, and on the other youhave a view of the church and village, and, beyond them,of those fine bold hills that we have so often admired.
I did not see it to advantage, for nothing could bemore forlorn than the furniture,--but if it were newlyfitted up--a couple of hundred pounds, Willoughby says,would make it one of the pleasantest summer-roomsin England."
Could Elinor have listened to her without interruptionfrom the others, she would have described every roomin the house with equal delight.
CHAPTER 14The sudden termination of Colonel Brandon's visitat the park, with his steadiness in concealing its cause,filled the mind, and raised the wonder of Mrs. Jenningsfor two or three days; she was a great wonderer, as everyone must be who takes a very lively interest in all thecomings and goings of all their acquaintance.
She wondered,with little intermission what could be the reason of it;was sure there must be some bad news, and thought overevery kind of distress that could have befallen him,with a fixed determination that he should not escapethem all.
"Something very melancholy must be the matter,I am sure," said she.
"I could see it in his face.
Poor man!
I am afraid his circumstances may be bad.
The estate at Delaford was never reckoned more than two thousanda year, and his brother left everything sadly involved.
I do think he must have been sent for about money matters,for what else can it be?
I wonder whether it is so.
I would give anything to know the truth of it.
Perhaps itis about Miss Williams and, by the bye, I dare say it is,because he looked so conscious when I mentioned her.
May be she is ill in town; nothing in the world more likely,for I have a notion she is always rather sickly.
I would lay any wager it is about Miss Williams.
It is not so very likely he should be distressed inhis circumstances NOW, for he is a very prudent man,and to be sure must have cleared the estate by this time.
I wonder what it can be!
May be his sister is worseat Avignon, and has sent for him over.
His setting offin such a hurry seems very like it.
Well, I wish him outof all his trouble with all my heart, and a good wife intothe bargain."
So wondered, so talked Mrs. Jennings.
Her opinionvarying with every fresh conjecture, and all seemingequally probable as they arose.
Elinor, though she feltreally interested in the welfare of Colonel Brandon,could not bestow all the wonder on his going so suddenlyaway, which Mrs. Jennings was desirous of her feeling;for besides that the circumstance did not in her opinionjustify such lasting amazement or variety of speculation,her wonder was otherwise disposed of.
It was engrossedby the extraordinary silence of her sister and Willoughbyon the subject, which they must know to be peculiarlyinteresting to them all.
As this silence continued,every day made it appear more strange and more incompatiblewith the disposition of both.
Why they should not openlyacknowledge to her mother and herself, what their constantbehaviour to each other declared to have taken place,Elinor could not imagine.
She could easily conceive that marriage might notbe immediately in their power; for though Willoughbywas independent, there was no reason to believe him rich.
His estate had been rated by Sir John at about six or sevenhundred a year; but he lived at an expense to which that incomecould hardly be equal, and he had himself often complainedof his poverty.
But for this strange kind of secrecymaintained by them relative to their engagement, whichin fact concealed nothing at all, she could not account;and it was so wholly contradictory to their generalopinions and practice, that a doubt sometimes enteredher mind of their being really engaged, and this doubtwas enough to prevent her making any inquiry of Marianne.
Nothing could be more expressive of attachmentto them all, than Willoughby's behaviour.
To Marianneit had all the distinguishing tenderness which a lover'sheart could give, and to the rest of the family it was theaffectionate attention of a son and a brother.
The cottageseemed to be considered and loved by him as his home;many more of his hours were spent there than at Allenham;and if no general engagement collected them at the park,the exercise which called him out in the morning wasalmost certain of ending there, where the rest of the daywas spent by himself at the side of Marianne, and by hisfavourite pointer at her feet.
One evening in particular, about a week afterColonel Brandon left the country, his heart seemedmore than usually open to every feeling of attachmentto the objects around him; and on Mrs. Dashwood'shappening to mention her design of improving the cottagein the spring, he warmly opposed every alterationof a place which affection had established as perfect with him.
"What!"
he exclaimed--"Improve this dear cottage!
No.
THAT I will never consent to.
Not a stone mustbe added to its walls, not an inch to its size,if my feelings are regarded."
"Do not be alarmed," said Miss Dashwood,"nothing of the kind will be done; for my motherwill never have money enough to attempt it."
"I am heartily glad of it," he cried.
"May shealways be poor, if she can employ her riches no better."
"Thank you, Willoughby.
But you may be assured that Iwould not sacrifice one sentiment of local attachmentof yours, or of any one whom I loved, for all the improvementsin the world.
Depend upon it that whatever unemployedsum may remain, when I make up my accounts in the spring,I would even rather lay it uselessly by than disposeof it in a manner so painful to you.
But are you reallyso attached to this place as to see no defect in it?"
"I am," said he.
"To me it is faultless.
Nay, more,I consider it as the only form of building in which happinessis attainable, and were I rich enough I would instantly pullCombe down, and build it up again in the exact plan of thiscottage."
"With dark narrow stairs and a kitchen that smokes,I suppose," said Elinor.
"Yes," cried he in the same eager tone, "with alland every thing belonging to it;--in no one convenienceor INconvenience about it, should the least variationbe perceptible.
Then, and then only, under such a roof, Imight perhaps be as happy at Combe as I have been at Barton."
"I flatter myself," replied Elinor, "that even underthe disadvantage of better rooms and a broader staircase,you will hereafter find your own house as faultless as younow do this."
"There certainly are circumstances," said Willoughby,"which might greatly endear it to me; but this place willalways have one claim of my affection, which no other canpossibly share."
Mrs. Dashwood looked with pleasure at Marianne,whose fine eyes were fixed so expressively on Willoughby,as plainly denoted how well she understood him.
"How often did I wish," added he, "when I was atAllenham this time twelvemonth, that Barton cottage wereinhabited!
I never passed within view of it without admiringits situation, and grieving that no one should live in it.
How little did I then think that the very first newsI should hear from Mrs. Smith, when I next came intothe country, would be that Barton cottage was taken: and Ifelt an immediate satisfaction and interest in the event,which nothing but a kind of prescience of what happiness Ishould experience from it, can account for.
Must it not havebeen so, Marianne?"
speaking to her in a lowered voice.
Then continuing his former tone, he said, "And yet thishouse you would spoil, Mrs. Dashwood?
You would rob itof its simplicity by imaginary improvement!
and this dearparlour in which our acquaintance first began, and in whichso many happy hours have been since spent by us together,you would degrade to the condition of a common entrance,and every body would be eager to pass through the roomwhich has hitherto contained within itself more realaccommodation and comfort than any other apartment ofthe handsomest dimensions in the world could possibly afford."
Mrs. Dashwood again assured him that no alterationof the kind should be attempted.
"You are a good woman," he warmly replied.
"Your promise makes me easy.
Extend it a little farther,and it will make me happy.
Tell me that not only yourhouse will remain the same, but that I shall ever findyou and yours as unchanged as your dwelling; and that youwill always consider me with the kindness which has madeeverything belonging to you so dear to me."
The promise was readily given, and Willoughby'sbehaviour during the whole of the evening declaredat once his affection and happiness.
"Shall we see you tomorrow to dinner?"
said Mrs. Dashwood,when he was leaving them.
"I do not ask you to come inthe morning, for we must walk to the park, to call on LadyMiddleton."
He engaged to be with them by four o'clock.
CHAPTER 15Mrs. Dashwood's visit to Lady Middleton took placethe next day, and two of her daughters went with her;but Marianne excused herself from being of the party,under some trifling pretext of employment; and her mother,who concluded that a promise had been made by Willoughbythe night before of calling on her while they were absent,was perfectly satisfied with her remaining at home.
On their return from the park they found Willoughby'scurricle and servant in waiting at the cottage,and Mrs. Dashwood was convinced that her conjecturehad been just.
So far it was all as she had foreseen;but on entering the house she beheld what no foresighthad taught her to expect.
They were no sooner in thepassage than Marianne came hastily out of the parlourapparently in violent affliction, with her handkerchiefat her eyes; and without noticing them ran up stairs.
Surprised and alarmed they proceeded directly into the roomshe had just quitted, where they found only Willoughby,who was leaning against the mantel-piece with his backtowards them.
He turned round on their coming in,and his countenance shewed that he strongly partookof the emotion which over-powered Marianne.
"Is anything the matter with her?"
cried Mrs. Dashwoodas she entered--"is she ill?"
"I hope not," he replied, trying to look cheerful;and with a forced smile presently added, "It is I who mayrather expect to be ill--for I am now suffering under avery heavy disappointment!"
"Disappointment?"
"Yes, for I am unable to keep my engagement with you.
Mrs. Smith has this morning exercised the privilegeof riches upon a poor dependent cousin, by sending me onbusiness to London.
I have just received my dispatches,and taken my farewell of Allenham; and by way of exhilarationI am now come to take my farewell of you."
"To London!--and are you going this morning?"
"Almost this moment."
"This is very unfortunate.
But Mrs. Smith mustbe obliged;--and her business will not detain you fromus long I hope."
He coloured as he replied, "You are very kind, but Ihave no idea of returning into Devonshire immediately.
My visits to Mrs. Smith are never repeated withinthe twelvemonth."
"And is Mrs. Smith your only friend?
Is Allenham the onlyhouse in the neighbourhood to which you will be welcome?
For shame, Willoughby, can you wait for an invitation here?"
His colour increased; and with his eyes fixedon the ground he only replied, "You are too good."
Mrs. Dashwood looked at Elinor with surprise.
Elinor felt equal amazement.
For a few moments every onewas silent.
Mrs. Dashwood first spoke.
"I have only to add, my dear Willoughby, that atBarton cottage you will always be welcome; for I will notpress you to return here immediately, because you onlycan judge how far THAT might be pleasing to Mrs. Smith;and on this head I shall be no more disposed to questionyour judgment than to doubt your inclination."
"My engagements at present," replied Willoughby,confusedly, "are of such a nature--that--I dare not flattermyself"--He stopt.
Mrs. Dashwood was too much astonishedto speak, and another pause succeeded.
This was brokenby Willoughby, who said with a faint smile, "It is follyto linger in this manner.
I will not torment myselfany longer by remaining among friends whose societyit is impossible for me now to enjoy."
He then hastily took leave of them all and leftthe room.
They saw him step into his carriage,and in a minute it was out of sight.
Mrs. Dashwood felt too much for speech, and instantlyquitted the parlour to give way in solitude to the concernand alarm which this sudden departure occasioned.
Elinor's uneasiness was at least equal to her mother's.
She thought of what had just passed with anxiety and distrust.
Willoughby's behaviour in taking leave of them, hisembarrassment,and affectation of cheerfulness, and, above all, hisunwillingnessto accept her mother's invitation, a backwardness so unlike alover,so unlike himself, greatly disturbed her.
One moment she fearedthat no serious design had ever been formed on his side; and thenext that some unfortunate quarrel had taken place between himandher sister;--the distress in which Marianne had quitted the roomwas such as a serious quarrel could most reasonably account for,though when she considered what Marianne's love for him was,a quarrel seemed almost impossible.
But whatever might be the particulars of their separation,her sister's affliction was indubitable; and she thoughtwith the tenderest compassion of that violent sorrowwhich Marianne was in all probability not merely givingway to as a relief, but feeding and encouraging as a duty.
In about half an hour her mother returned, and thoughher eyes were red, her countenance was not uncheerful.
"Our dear Willoughby is now some miles from Barton, Elinor,"said she, as she sat down to work, "and with how heavy a heartdoes he travel?"
"It is all very strange.
So suddenly to be gone!
Itseems but the work of a moment.
And last night he waswith us so happy, so cheerful, so affectionate?
And now,after only ten minutes notice--Gone too without intendingto return!--Something more than what be owned to us musthave happened.
He did not speak, he did not behavelike himself.
YOU must have seen the difference as well as I.
What can it be?
Can they have quarrelled?
Why else should hehave shewn such unwillingness to accept your invitation here?"
--"It was not inclination that he wanted, Elinor; I couldplainly see THAT.
He had not the power of accepting it.
I have thought it all over I assure you, and I canperfectly account for every thing that at first seemedstrange to me as well as to you."
"Can you, indeed!"
"Yes.
I have explained it to myself in the mostsatisfactory way;--but you, Elinor, who love to doubtwhere you can--it will not satisfy YOU, I know; but youshall not talk ME out of my trust in it.
I am persuadedthat Mrs. Smith suspects his regard for Marianne,disapproves of it, (perhaps because she has other viewsfor him,) and on that account is eager to get him away;--and that the business which she sends him off to transactis invented as an excuse to dismiss him.
This is what Ibelieve to have happened.
He is, moreover, aware that sheDOES disapprove the connection, he dares not thereforeat present confess to her his engagement with Marianne,and he feels himself obliged, from his dependent situation,to give into her schemes, and absent himself fromDevonshire for a while.
You will tell me, I know,that this may or may NOT have happened; but I will listento no cavil, unless you can point out any other methodof understanding the affair as satisfactory at this.
And now, Elinor, what have you to say?"
"Nothing, for you have anticipated my answer."
"Then you would have told me, that it might or might nothave happened.
Oh, Elinor, how incomprehensible are yourfeelings!
You had rather take evil upon credit than good.
You had rather look out for misery for Marianne, and guiltfor poor Willoughby, than an apology for the latter.
You are resolved to think him blameable, because he tookleave of us with less affection than his usual behaviourhas shewn.
And is no allowance to be made for inadvertence,or for spirits depressed by recent disappointment?
Areno probabilities to be accepted, merely because theyare not certainties?
Is nothing due to the man whom wehave all such reason to love, and no reason in the worldto think ill of?
To the possibility of motives unanswerablein themselves, though unavoidably secret for a while?
And,after all, what is it you suspect him of?"
"I can hardly tell myself.
But suspicion ofsomething unpleasant is the inevitable consequenceof such an alteration as we just witnessed in him.
There is great truth, however, in what you have now urgedof the allowances which ought to be made for him, and itis my wish to be candid in my judgment of every body.
Willoughby may undoubtedly have very sufficientreasons for his conduct, and I will hope that he has.
But it would have been more like Willoughby to acknowledgethem at once.
Secrecy may be advisable; but still Icannot help wondering at its being practiced by him."
"Do not blame him, however, for departing fromhis character, where the deviation is necessary.
But you really do admit the justice of what I have saidin his defence?--I am happy--and he is acquitted."
"Not entirely.
It may be proper to conceal theirengagement (if they ARE engaged) from Mrs. Smith--and if that is the case, it must be highly expedientfor Willoughby to be but little in Devonshire at present.
But this is no excuse for their concealing it from us."
"Concealing it from us!
my dear child, do you accuseWilloughby and Marianne of concealment?
This is strangeindeed, when your eyes have been reproaching them every dayfor incautiousness."
"I want no proof of their affection," said Elinor;"but of their engagement I do."
"I am perfectly satisfied of both."
"Yet not a syllable has been said to you on thesubject, by either of them."
"I have not wanted syllables where actions havespoken so plainly.
Has not his behaviour to Marianneand to all of us, for at least the last fortnight,declared that he loved and considered her as his future wife,and that he felt for us the attachment of the nearestrelation?
Have we not perfectly understood each other?
Has not my consent been daily asked by his looks, his manner,his attentive and affectionate respect?
My Elinor,is it possible to doubt their engagement?
How couldsuch a thought occur to you?
How is it to be supposedthat Willoughby, persuaded as he must be of yoursister's love, should leave her, and leave her perhapsfor months, without telling her of his affection;--thatthey should part without a mutual exchange of confidence?"
"I confess," replied Elinor, "that every circumstanceexcept ONE is in favour of their engagement;but that ONE is the total silence of both on the subject,and with me it almost outweighs every other."
"How strange this is!
You must think wretchedly indeedof Willoughby, if, after all that has openly passed between them,you can doubt the nature of the terms on which they are together.
Has he been acting a part in his behaviour to your sisterall this time?
Do you suppose him really indifferent to her?"
"No, I cannot think that.
He must and does love herI am sure."
"But with a strange kind of tenderness, if he canleave her with such indifference, such carelessnessof the future, as you attribute to him."
"You must remember, my dear mother, that I have neverconsidered this matter as certain.
I have had my doubts,I confess; but they are fainter than they were, and theymay soon be entirely done away.
If we find they correspond,every fear of mine will be removed."
"A mighty concession indeed!
If you were to seethem at the altar, you would suppose they were going tobe married.
Ungracious girl!
But I require no such proof.
Nothing in my opinion has ever passed to justify doubt;no secrecy has been attempted; all has been uniformly openand unreserved.
You cannot doubt your sister's wishes.
It must be Willoughby therefore whom you suspect.
But why?
Is he not a man of honour and feeling?
Has there been anyinconsistency on his side to create alarm?
can he be deceitful?"
"I hope not, I believe not," cried Elinor.
"I love Willoughby, sincerely love him; and suspicion of hisintegrity cannot be more painful to yourself than to me.
It has been involuntary, and I will not encourage it.
I was startled, I confess, by the alteration in hismanners this morning;--he did not speak like himself,and did not return your kindness with any cordiality.
But all this may be explained by such a situation of hisaffairs as you have supposed.
He had just parted frommy sister, had seen her leave him in the greatest affliction;and if he felt obliged, from a fear of offending Mrs. Smith,to resist the temptation of returning here soon, and yetaware that by declining your invitation, by sayingthat he was going away for some time, he should seemto act an ungenerous, a suspicious part by our family,be might well be embarrassed and disturbed.
In such a case,a plain and open avowal of his difficulties would have beenmore to his honour I think, as well as more consistentwith his general character;--but I will not raise objectionsagainst any one's conduct on so illiberal a foundation,as a difference in judgment from myself, or a deviation fromwhat I may think right and consistent."
"You speak very properly.
Willoughby certainly doesnot deserve to be suspected.
Though WE have not knownhim long, he is no stranger in this part of the world;and who has ever spoken to his disadvantage?
Had he beenin a situation to act independently and marry immediately,it might have been odd that he should leave us withoutacknowledging everything to me at once: but this is not the case.
It is an engagement in some respects not prosperously begun,for their marriage must be at a very uncertain distance;and even secrecy, as far as it can be observed, may nowbe very advisable."
They were interrupted by the entrance of Margaret;and Elinor was then at liberty to think over the representationsof her mother, to acknowledge the probability of many,and hope for the justice of all.
They saw nothing of Marianne till dinner time,when she entered the room and took her place at the tablewithout saying a word.
Her eyes were red and swollen;and it seemed as if her tears were even then restrainedwith difficulty.
She avoided the looks of them all,could neither eat nor speak, and after some time, on hermother's silently pressing her hand with tender compassion,her small degree of fortitude was quite overcome, she burstinto tears and left the room.
This violent oppression of spirits continued thewhole evening.
She was without any power, because shewas without any desire of command over herself.
The slightest mention of anything relative to Willoughbyoverpowered her in an instant; and though her familywere most anxiously attentive to her comfort, it wasimpossible for them, if they spoke at all, to keep clearof every subject which her feelings connected with him.
CHAPTER 16Marianne would have thought herself very inexcusablehad she been able to sleep at all the first nightafter parting from Willoughby.
She would have beenashamed to look her family in the face the next morning,had she not risen from her bed in more need of reposethan when she lay down in it.
But the feelings whichmade such composure a disgrace, left her in no dangerof incurring it.
She was awake the whole night, and shewept the greatest part of it.
She got up with a headache,was unable to talk, and unwilling to take any nourishment;giving pain every moment to her mother and sisters,and forbidding all attempt at consolation from either.
Her sensibility was potent enough!
When breakfast was over she walked out by herself,and wandered about the village of Allenham, indulging therecollection of past enjoyment and crying over the presentreverse for the chief of the morning.
The evening passed off in the equal indulgence of feeling.
She played over every favourite song that she had been usedto play to Willoughby, every air in which their voiceshad been oftenest joined, and sat at the instrument gazingon every line of music that he had written out for her,till her heart was so heavy that no farther sadnesscould be gained; and this nourishment of grief was everyday applied.
She spent whole hours at the pianofortealternately singing and crying; her voice often totallysuspended by her tears.
In books too, as well as in music,she courted the misery which a contrast between the pastand present was certain of giving.
She read nothingbut what they had been used to read together.
Such violence of affliction indeed could not be supportedfor ever; it sunk within a few days into a calmer melancholy;but these employments, to which she daily recurred,her solitary walks and silent meditations, still producedoccasional effusions of sorrow as lively as ever.
No letter from Willoughby came; and none seemed expectedby Marianne.
Her mother was surprised, and Elinor againbecame uneasy.
But Mrs. Dashwood could find explanationswhenever she wanted them, which at least satisfied herself.
"Remember, Elinor," said she, "how very often Sir Johnfetches our letters himself from the post, and carries themto it.
We have already agreed that secrecy may be necessary,and we must acknowledge that it could not be maintained iftheir correspondence were to pass through Sir John's hands."
Elinor could not deny the truth of this, and she triedto find in it a motive sufficient for their silence.
But there was one method so direct, so simple, and inher opinion so eligible of knowing the real stateof the affair, and of instantly removing all mystery,that she could not help suggesting it to her mother.
"Why do you not ask Marianne at once," said she,"whether she is or she is not engaged to Willoughby?
From you,her mother, and so kind, so indulgent a mother, the questioncould not give offence.
It would be the natural resultof your affection for her.
She used to be all unreserve,and to you more especially."
"I would not ask such a question for the world.
Supposing it possible that they are not engaged,what distress would not such an enquiry inflict!
At anyrate it would be most ungenerous.
I should never deserveher confidence again, after forcing from her a confessionof what is meant at present to be unacknowledged to any one.
I know Marianne's heart: I know that she dearly loves me,and that I shall not be the last to whom the affair is madeknown,when circumstances make the revealment of it eligible.
I would not attempt to force the confidence of any one;of a child much less; because a sense of duty would preventthe denial which her wishes might direct."
Elinor thought this generosity overstrained,considering her sister's youth, and urged the matter farther,but in vain; common sense, common care, common prudence,were all sunk in Mrs. Dashwood's romantic delicacy.
It was several days before Willoughby's namewas mentioned before Marianne by any of her family;Sir John and Mrs. Jennings, indeed, were not so nice;their witticisms added pain to many a painful hour;--but one evening, Mrs. Dashwood, accidentally taking up avolume of Shakespeare, exclaimed,"We have never finished Hamlet, Marianne; our dearWilloughby went away before we could get through it.
We will put it by, that when he comes again...But it maybe months, perhaps, before THAT happens."
"Months!"
cried Marianne, with strong surprise.
"No--nor many weeks."
Mrs. Dashwood was sorry for what she had said;but it gave Elinor pleasure, as it produced a replyfrom Marianne so expressive of confidence in Willoughbyand knowledge of his intentions.
One morning, about a week after his leaving the country,Marianne was prevailed on to join her sisters in theirusual walk, instead of wandering away by herself.
Hitherto she had carefully avoided every companion inher rambles.
If her sisters intended to walk on the downs,she directly stole away towards the lanes; if they talkedof the valley, she was as speedy in climbing the hills,and could never be found when the others set off.
But at length she was secured by the exertions of Elinor,who greatly disapproved such continual seclusion.
They walkedalong the road through the valley, and chiefly in silence,for Marianne's MIND could not be controlled, and Elinor,satisfied with gaining one point, would not then attempt more.
Beyond the entrance of the valley, where the country,though still rich, was less wild and more open, a longstretch of the road which they had travelled on first comingto Barton, lay before them; and on reaching that point,they stopped to look around them, and examine a prospectwhich formed the distance of their view from the cottage,from a spot which they had never happened to reach in anyof their walks before.
Amongst the objects in the scene, they soon discoveredan animated one; it was a man on horseback riding towards them.
In a few minutes they could distinguish him to be a gentleman;and in a moment afterwards Marianne rapturously exclaimed,"It is he; it is indeed;--I know it is!"
--and washastening to meet him, when Elinor cried out,"Indeed, Marianne, I think you are mistaken.
It isnot Willoughby.
The person is not tall enough for him,and has not his air."
"He has, he has," cried Marianne, "I am sure he has.
His air, his coat, his horse.
I knew how soon he would come."
She walked eagerly on as she spoke; and Elinor,to screen Marianne from particularity, as she felt almostcertain of its not being Willoughby, quickened herpace and kept up with her.
They were soon withinthirty yards of the gentleman.
Marianne looked again;her heart sunk within her; and abruptly turning round,she was hurrying back, when the voices of both her sisterswere raised to detain her; a third, almost as well knownas Willoughby's, joined them in begging her to stop,and she turned round with surprise to see and welcomeEdward Ferrars.
He was the only person in the world who couldat that moment be forgiven for not being Willoughby;the only one who could have gained a smile from her;but she dispersed her tears to smile on HIM, and in hersister's happiness forgot for a time her own disappointment.
He dismounted, and giving his horse to his servant,walked back with them to Barton, whither he was purposelycoming to visit them.
He was welcomed by them all with great cordiality,but especially by Marianne, who showed more warmth ofregard in her reception of him than even Elinor herself.
To Marianne, indeed, the meeting between Edward and her sisterwas but a continuation of that unaccountable coldness which shehad often observed at Norland in their mutual behaviour.
On Edward's side, more particularly, there was a deficiencyof all that a lover ought to look and say on such an occasion.
He was confused, seemed scarcely sensible of pleasurein seeing them, looked neither rapturous nor gay,said little but what was forced from him by questions,and distinguished Elinor by no mark of affection.
Marianne saw and listened with increasing surprise.
She began almost to feel a dislike of Edward; and it ended,as every feeling must end with her, by carrying back herthoughts to Willoughby, whose manners formed a contrastsufficiently striking to those of his brother elect.
After a short silence which succeeded the firstsurprise and enquiries of meeting, Marianne askedEdward if he came directly from London.
No, he hadbeen in Devonshire a fortnight.
"A fortnight!"
she repeated, surprised at his beingso long in the same county with Elinor without seeingher before.
He looked rather distressed as he added, that hehad been staying with some friends near Plymouth.
"Have you been lately in Sussex?"
said Elinor.
"I was at Norland about a month ago."
"And how does dear, dear Norland look?"
cried Marianne.
"Dear, dear Norland," said Elinor, "probably looksmuch as it always does at this time of the year.
The woods and walks thickly covered with dead leaves."
"Oh," cried Marianne, "with what transporting sensationhave I formerly seen them fall!
How have I delighted,as I walked, to see them driven in showers about meby the wind!
What feelings have they, the season, the airaltogether inspired!
Now there is no one to regard them.
They are seen only as a nuisance, swept hastily off,and driven as much as possible from the sight."
"It is not every one," said Elinor, "who has yourpassion for dead leaves."
"No; my feelings are not often shared, not oftenunderstood.
But SOMETIMES they are."
--As she said this,she sunk into a reverie for a few moments;--but rousingherself again, "Now, Edward," said she, calling his attentionto the prospect, "here is Barton valley.
Look up to it,and be tranquil if you can.
Look at those hills!
Did you ever see their equals?
To the left is Barton park,amongst those woods and plantations.
You may see the endof the house.
And there, beneath that farthest hill,which rises with such grandeur, is our cottage."
"It is a beautiful country," he replied; "but thesebottoms must be dirty in winter."
"How can you think of dirt, with such objects before you?"
"Because," replied he, smiling, "among the rest of theobjects before me, I see a very dirty lane."
"How strange!"
said Marianne to herself as she walked on.
"Have you an agreeable neighbourhood here?
Are theMiddletons pleasant people?"
"No, not all," answered Marianne; "we could notbe more unfortunately situated."
"Marianne," cried her sister, "how can you say so?
How canyou be so unjust?
They are a very respectable family, Mr.Ferrars;and towards us have behaved in the friendliest manner.
Have youforgot, Marianne, how many pleasant days we have owed to them?"
"No," said Marianne, in a low voice, "nor how manypainful moments."
Elinor took no notice of this; and directingher attention to their visitor, endeavoured to supportsomething like discourse with him, by talking of theirpresent residence, its conveniences, &c. extorting from himoccasional questions and remarks.
His coldness and reservemortified her severely; she was vexed and half angry;but resolving to regulate her behaviour to him by the pastrather than the present, she avoided every appearanceof resentment or displeasure, and treated him as shethought he ought to be treated from the family connection.
CHAPTER 17Mrs. Dashwood was surprised only for a moment atseeing him; for his coming to Barton was, in her opinion,of all things the most natural.
Her joy and expressionof regard long outlived her wonder.
He received the kindestwelcome from her; and shyness, coldness, reserve could notstand against such a reception.
They had begun to fail himbefore he entered the house, and they were quite overcomeby the captivating manners of Mrs. Dashwood.
Indeed a mancould not very well be in love with either of her daughters,without extending the passion to her; and Elinor had thesatisfaction of seeing him soon become more like himself.
His affections seemed to reanimate towards them all,and his interest in their welfare again became perceptible.
He was not in spirits, however; he praised their house,admired its prospect, was attentive, and kind; but stillhe was not in spirits.
The whole family perceived it,and Mrs. Dashwood, attributing it to some want of liberalityin his mother, sat down to table indignant against allselfish parents.
"What are Mrs. Ferrars's views for you at present, Edward?"
said she, when dinner was over and they had drawn roundthe fire; "are you still to be a great orator in spite ofyourself?"
"No.
I hope my mother is now convinced that I haveno more talents than inclination for a public life!"
"But how is your fame to be established?
for famous youmust be to satisfy all your family; and with no inclinationfor expense, no affection for strangers, no profession,and no assurance, you may find it a difficult matter."
"I shall not attempt it.
I have no wish to bedistinguished; and have every reason to hope I never shall.
Thank Heaven!
I cannot be forced into genius and eloquence."
"You have no ambition, I well know.
Your wishesare all moderate."
"As moderate as those of the rest of the world,I believe.
I wish as well as every body else to beperfectly happy; but, like every body else it must bein my own way.
Greatness will not make me so."
"Strange that it would!"
cried Marianne.
"What havewealth or grandeur to do with happiness?"
"Grandeur has but little," said Elinor, "but wealthhas much to do with it."
"Elinor, for shame!"
said Marianne, "money can onlygive happiness where there is nothing else to give it.
Beyond a competence, it can afford no real satisfaction,as far as mere self is concerned."
"Perhaps," said Elinor, smiling, "we may cometo the same point.
YOUR competence and MY wealthare very much alike, I dare say; and without them,as the world goes now, we shall both agree that everykind of external comfort must be wanting.
Your ideasare only more noble than mine.
Come, what is your competence?"
"About eighteen hundred or two thousand a year;not more than THAT."
Elinor laughed.
"TWO thousand a year!
ONE is mywealth!
I guessed how it would end."
"And yet two thousand a-year is a very moderate income,"said Marianne.
"A family cannot well be maintained ona smaller.
I am sure I am not extravagant in my demands.
A proper establishment of servants, a carriage, perhaps two,and hunters, cannot be supported on less."
Elinor smiled again, to hear her sister describingso accurately their future expenses at Combe Magna.
"Hunters!"
repeated Edward--"but why must you havehunters?
Every body does not hunt."
Marianne coloured as she replied, "But most people do."
"I wish," said Margaret, striking out a novel thought,"that somebody would give us all a large fortune apiece!"
"Oh that they would!"
cried Marianne, her eyessparkling with animation, and her cheeks glowingwith the delight of such imaginary happiness.
"We are all unanimous in that wish, I suppose,"said Elinor, "in spite of the insufficiency of wealth."
"Oh dear!"
cried Margaret, "how happy I should be!
I wonder what I should do with it!"
Marianne looked as if she had no doubt on that point.
"I should be puzzled to spend so large a fortune myself,"said Mrs. Dashwood, "if my children were all to be richmy help."
"You must begin your improvements on this house,"observed Elinor, "and your difficulties will soon vanish."
"What magnificent orders would travel from this familyto London," said Edward, "in such an event!
What a happyday for booksellers, music-sellers, and print-shops!
You,Miss Dashwood, would give a general commission for everynew print of merit to be sent you--and as for Marianne,I know her greatness of soul, there would not be music enoughin London to content her.
And books!--Thomson, Cowper,Scott--she would buy them all over and over again: shewould buy up every copy, I believe, to prevent theirfalling into unworthy hands; and she would have everybook that tells her how to admire an old twisted tree.
Should not you, Marianne?
Forgive me, if I am very saucy.
But I was willing to shew you that I had not forgot ourold disputes."
"I love to be reminded of the past, Edward--whether itbe melancholy or gay, I love to recall it--and youwill never offend me by talking of former times.
You are very right in supposing how my money would bespent--some of it, at least--my loose cash would certainlybe employed in improving my collection of music and books."
"And the bulk of your fortune would be laid outin annuities on the authors or their heirs."
"No, Edward, I should have something else to dowith it."
"Perhaps, then, you would bestow it as a reward on thatperson who wrote the ablest defence of your favourite maxim,that no one can ever be in love more than once in theirlife--your opinion on that point is unchanged, I presume?"
"Undoubtedly.
At my time of life opinions are tolerably fixed.
It is not likely that I should now see or hear any thing tochange them."
"Marianne is as steadfast as ever, you see," said Elinor,"she is not at all altered."
"She is only grown a little more grave than she was."
"Nay, Edward," said Marianne, "you need not reproach me.
You are not very gay yourself."
"Why should you think so!"
replied he, with a sigh.
"But gaiety never was a part of MY character."
"Nor do I think it a part of Marianne's," said Elinor;"I should hardly call her a lively girl--she is very earnest,very eager in all she does--sometimes talks a great dealand always with animation--but she is not often really merry."
"I believe you are right," he replied, "and yet Ihave always set her down as a lively girl."
"I have frequently detected myself in such kind of mistakes,"said Elinor, "in a total misapprehension of character in somepoint or other: fancying people so much more gay or grave,or ingenious or stupid than they really are, and I canhardly tell why or in what the deception originated.
Sometimes one is guided by what they say of themselves,and very frequently by what other people say of them,without giving oneself time to deliberate and judge."
"But I thought it was right, Elinor," said Marianne,"to be guided wholly by the opinion of other people.
I thought our judgments were given us merely to be subservientto those of neighbours.
This has always been your doctrine,I am sure."
"No, Marianne, never.
My doctrine has never aimedat the subjection of the understanding.
All I haveever attempted to influence has been the behaviour.
You must not confound my meaning.
I am guilty, I confess,of having often wished you to treat our acquaintancein general with greater attention; but when have I advisedyou to adopt their sentiments or to conform to theirjudgment in serious matters?"
"You have not been able to bring your sister over to yourplan of general civility," said Edward to Elinor, "Do you gainno ground?"
"Quite the contrary," replied Elinor,looking expressively at Marianne.
"My judgment," he returned, "is all on your sideof the question; but I am afraid my practice is muchmore on your sister's.
I never wish to offend, but Iam so foolishly shy, that I often seem negligent,when I am only kept back by my natural awkwardness.
I have frequently thought that I must have been intendedby nature to be fond of low company, I am so little atmy ease among strangers of gentility!"
"Marianne has not shyness to excuse any inattentionof hers," said Elinor.
"She knows her own worth too well for false shame,"replied Edward.
"Shyness is only the effect of a senseof inferiority in some way or other.
If I could persuademyself that my manners were perfectly easy and graceful,I should not be shy."
"But you would still be reserved," said Marianne,"and that is worse."
Edward started--"Reserved!
Am I reserved, Marianne?"
"Yes, very."
"I do not understand you," replied he, colouring.
"Reserved!--how, in what manner?
What am I to tell you?
What can you suppose?"
Elinor looked surprised at his emotion; but tryingto laugh off the subject, she said to him, "Do not youknow my sister well enough to understand what she means?
Do not you know she calls every one reserved who does nottalk as fast, and admire what she admires as rapturouslyas herself?"
Edward made no answer.
His gravity and thoughtfulnessreturned on him in their fullest extent--and he satfor some time silent and dull.
CHAPTER 18Elinor saw, with great uneasiness the low spiritsof her friend.
His visit afforded her but a verypartial satisfaction, while his own enjoyment in itappeared so imperfect.
It was evident that he was unhappy;she wished it were equally evident that he stilldistinguished her by the same affection which onceshe had felt no doubt of inspiring; but hitherto thecontinuance of his preference seemed very uncertain;and the reservedness of his manner towards her contradictedone moment what a more animated look had intimated the precedingone.
He joined her and Marianne in the breakfast-roomthe next morning before the others were down; and Marianne,who was always eager to promote their happiness as faras she could, soon left them to themselves.
But before shewas half way upstairs she heard the parlour door open, and,turning round, was astonished to see Edward himself come out.
"I am going into the village to see my horses,"said be, "as you are not yet ready for breakfast; I shallbe back again presently."
***Edward returned to them with fresh admirationof the surrounding country; in his walk to the village,he had seen many parts of the valley to advantage;and the village itself, in a much higher situation thanthe cottage, afforded a general view of the whole, which hadexceedingly pleased him.
This was a subject which ensuredMarianne's attention, and she was beginning to describeher own admiration of these scenes, and to question him moreminutely on the objects that had particularly struck him,when Edward interrupted her by saying, "You must notenquire too far, Marianne--remember I have no knowledgein the picturesque, and I shall offend you by my ignoranceand want of taste if we come to particulars.
I shall callhills steep, which ought to be bold; surfaces strangeand uncouth, which ought to be irregular and rugged;and distant objects out of sight, which ought only to beindistinct through the soft medium of a hazy atmosphere.
You must be satisfied with such admiration as I canhonestly give.
I call it a very fine country--thehills are steep, the woods seem full of fine timber,and the valley looks comfortable and snug--with richmeadows and several neat farm houses scattered hereand there.
It exactly answers my idea of a fine country,because it unites beauty with utility--and I dare say itis a picturesque one too, because you admire it; I caneasily believe it to be full of rocks and promontories,grey moss and brush wood, but these are all lost on me.
I know nothing of the picturesque."
"I am afraid it is but too true," said Marianne;"but why should you boast of it?"
"I suspect," said Elinor, "that to avoid one kindof affectation, Edward here falls into another.
Because hebelieves many people pretend to more admiration of the beautiesof nature than they really feel, and is disgusted withsuch pretensions, he affects greater indifference and lessdiscrimination in viewing them himself than he possesses.
He is fastidious and will have an affectation of his own."
"It is very true," said Marianne, "that admirationof landscape scenery is become a mere jargon.
Every body pretends to feel and tries to describe withthe taste and elegance of him who first defined whatpicturesque beauty was.
I detest jargon of every kind,and sometimes I have kept my feelings to myself,because I could find no language to describe themin but what was worn and hackneyed out of all sense and meaning."
"I am convinced," said Edward, "that you really feelall the delight in a fine prospect which you professto feel.
But, in return, your sister must allow meto feel no more than I profess.
I like a fine prospect,but not on picturesque principles.
I do not like crooked,twisted, blasted trees.
I admire them much more if theyare tall, straight, and flourishing.
I do not like ruined,tattered cottages.
I am not fond of nettles or thistles,or heath blossoms.
I have more pleasure in a snugfarm-house than a watch-tower--and a troop of tidy,happy villages please me better than the finest bandittiin the world."
Marianne looked with amazement at Edward,with compassion at her sister.
Elinor only laughed.
The subject was continued no farther; and Marianneremained thoughtfully silent, till a new object suddenlyengaged her attention.
She was sitting by Edward, andin taking his tea from Mrs. Dashwood, his hand passedso directly before her, as to make a ring, with a plaitof hair in the centre, very conspicuous on one of his fingers.
"I never saw you wear a ring before, Edward," she cried.
"Is that Fanny's hair?
I remember her promising to giveyou some.
But I should have thought her hair had been darker."
Marianne spoke inconsiderately what she really felt--but when she saw how much she had pained Edward, her ownvexation at her want of thought could not be surpassedby his.
He coloured very deeply, and giving a momentaryglance at Elinor, replied, "Yes; it is my sister's hair.
The setting always casts a different shade on it,you know."
Elinor had met his eye, and looked conscious likewise.
That the hair was her own, she instantaneously felt aswell satisfied as Marianne; the only difference in theirconclusions was, that what Marianne considered as a freegift from her sister, Elinor was conscious must have beenprocured by some theft or contrivance unknown to herself.
She was not in a humour, however, to regard it as an affront,and affecting to take no notice of what passed,by instantly talking of something else, she internallyresolved henceforward to catch every opportunity of eyeingthe hair and of satisfying herself, beyond all doubt,that it was exactly the shade of her own.
Edward's embarrassment lasted some time, and itended in an absence of mind still more settled.
He was particularly grave the whole morning.
Marianne severely censured herself for what she had said;but her own forgiveness might have been more speedy,had she known how little offence it had given her sister.
Before the middle of the day, they were visited by SirJohn and Mrs. Jennings, who, having heard of the arrivalof a gentleman at the cottage, came to take a surveyof the guest.
With the assistance of his mother-in-law,Sir John was not long in discovering that the name ofFerrars began with an F. and this prepared a future mineof raillery against the devoted Elinor, which nothing butthe newness of their acquaintance with Edward could haveprevented from being immediately sprung.
But, as it was,she only learned, from some very significant looks, how fartheir penetration, founded on Margaret's instructions, extended.
Sir John never came to the Dashwoods without eitherinviting them to dine at the park the next day, or to drinktea with them that evening.
On the present occasion,for the better entertainment of their visitor, towardswhose amusement he felt himself bound to contribute,he wished to engage them for both.
"You MUST drink tea with us to night," said he,"for we shall be quite alone--and tomorrow you mustabsolutely dine with us, for we shall be a large party."
Mrs. Jennings enforced the necessity.
"And who knowsbut you may raise a dance," said she.
"And that willtempt YOU, Miss Marianne."
"A dance!"
cried Marianne.
"Impossible!
Who is to dance?"
"Who!
why yourselves, and the Careys, and Whitakersto be sure.--What!
you thought nobody could dancebecause a certain person that shall be nameless is gone!"
"I wish with all my soul," cried Sir John,"that Willoughby were among us again."
This, and Marianne's blushing, gave new suspicionsto Edward.
"And who is Willoughby?"
said he, in a low voice,to Miss Dashwood, by whom he was sitting.
She gave him a brief reply.
Marianne's countenancewas more communicative.
Edward saw enough to comprehend,not only the meaning of others, but such of Marianne'sexpressions as had puzzled him before; and when theirvisitors left them, he went immediately round her, and said,in a whisper, "I have been guessing.
Shall I tell youmy guess?"
"What do you mean?"
"Shall I tell you."
"Certainly."
"Well then; I guess that Mr. Willoughby hunts."
Marianne was surprised and confused, yet she couldnot help smiling at the quiet archness of his manner,and after a moment's silence, said,"Oh, Edward!
How can you?--But the time will comeI hope...I am sure you will like him."
"I do not doubt it," replied he, rather astonishedat her earnestness and warmth; for had he not imagined itto be a joke for the good of her acquaintance in general,founded only on a something or a nothing between Mr. Willoughbyand herself, he would not have ventured to mention it.
CHAPTER 19Edward remained a week at the cottage; he was earnestlypressed by Mrs. Dashwood to stay longer; but, as if hewere bent only on self-mortification, he seemed resolvedto be gone when his enjoyment among his friends was atthe height.
His spirits, during the last two or three days,though still very unequal, were greatly improved--he grewmore and more partial to the house and environs--neverspoke of going away without a sigh--declared his timeto be wholly disengaged--even doubted to what place heshould go when he left them--but still, go he must.
Never had any week passed so quickly--he could hardlybelieve it to be gone.
He said so repeatedly; other thingshe said too, which marked the turn of his feelings and gavethe lie to his actions.
He had no pleasure at Norland;he detested being in town; but either to Norland or London,he must go.
He valued their kindness beyond any thing,and his greatest happiness was in being with them.
Yet, he must leave them at the end of a week, in spiteof their wishes and his own, and without any restrainton his time.
Elinor placed all that was astonishing in thisway of acting to his mother's account; and it washappy for her that he had a mother whose characterwas so imperfectly known to her, as to be the generalexcuse for every thing strange on the part of her son.
Disappointed, however, and vexed as she was, and sometimesdispleased with his uncertain behaviour to herself,she was very well disposed on the whole to regard his actionswith all the candid allowances and generous qualifications,which had been rather more painfully extorted from her,for Willoughby's service, by her mother.
His want of spirits,of openness, and of consistency, were most usuallyattributed to his want of independence, and his betterknowledge of Mrs. Ferrars's disposition and designs.
The shortness of his visit, the steadiness of his purposein leaving them, originated in the same fettered inclination,the same inevitable necessity of temporizing with his mother.
The old well-established grievance of duty against will,parent against child, was the cause of all.
She would havebeen glad to know when these difficulties were to cease,this opposition was to yield,--when Mrs. Ferrars wouldbe reformed, and her son be at liberty to be happy.
But from such vain wishes she was forced to turn for comfortto the renewal of her confidence in Edward's affection,to the remembrance of every mark of regard in look or wordwhich fell from him while at Barton, and above allto that flattering proof of it which he constantly woreround his finger.
"I think, Edward," said Mrs. Dashwood, as they wereat breakfast the last morning, "you would be a happier manif you had any profession to engage your time and givean interest to your plans and actions.
Some inconvenienceto your friends, indeed, might result from it--youwould not be able to give them so much of your time.
But (with a smile) you would be materially benefitedin one particular at least--you would know where to gowhen you left them."
"I do assure you," he replied, "that I have longthought on this point, as you think now.
It has been,and is, and probably will always be a heavy misfortuneto me, that I have had no necessary business to engage me,no profession to give me employment, or afford me anything like independence.
But unfortunately my own nicety,and the nicety of my friends, have made me what I am,an idle, helpless being.
We never could agree in ourchoice of a profession.
I always preferred the church,as I still do.
But that was not smart enough for my family.
They recommended the army.
That was a great dealtoo smart for me.
The law was allowed to be genteelenough; many young men, who had chambers in the Temple,made a very good appearance in the first circles,and drove about town in very knowing gigs.
But I hadno inclination for the law, even in this less abstrusestudy of it, which my family approved.
As for the navy,it had fashion on its side, but I was too old when thesubject was first started to enter it--and, at length,as there was no necessity for my having any professionat all, as I might be as dashing and expensive withouta red coat on my back as with one, idleness was pronouncedon the whole to be most advantageous and honourable,and a young man of eighteen is not in general so earnestlybent on being busy as to resist the solicitations of hisfriends to do nothing.
I was therefore entered at Oxfordand have been properly idle ever since."
"The consequence of which, I suppose, will be,"said Mrs. Dashwood, "since leisure has not promotedyour own happiness, that your sons will be brought upto as many pursuits, employments, professions, and tradesas Columella's."
"They will be brought up," said he, in a serious accent,"to be as unlike myself as is possible.
In feeling,in action, in condition, in every thing."
"Come, come; this is all an effusion of immediatewant of spirits, Edward.
You are in a melancholy humour,and fancy that any one unlike yourself must be happy.
But remember that the pain of parting from friendswill be felt by every body at times, whatever be theireducation or state.
Know your own happiness.
You wantnothing but patience--or give it a more fascinating name,call it hope.
Your mother will secure to you, in time,that independence you are so anxious for; it is her duty,and it will, it must ere long become her happiness toprevent your whole youth from being wasted in discontent.
How much may not a few months do?"
"I think," replied Edward, "that I may defy manymonths to produce any good to me."
This desponding turn of mind, though it could notbe communicated to Mrs. Dashwood, gave additional painto them all in the parting, which shortly took place,and left an uncomfortable impression on Elinor'sfeelings especially, which required some trouble and timeto subdue.
But as it was her determination to subdue it,and to prevent herself from appearing to suffer more thanwhat all her family suffered on his going away, she didnot adopt the method so judiciously employed by Marianne,on a similar occasion, to augment and fix her sorrow,by seeking silence, solitude and idleness.
Their meanswere as different as their objects, and equally suitedto the advancement of each.
Elinor sat down to her drawing-table as soon as hewas out of the house, busily employed herself the whole day,neither sought nor avoided the mention of his name,appeared to interest herself almost as much as ever in thegeneral concerns of the family, and if, by this conduct,she did not lessen her own grief, it was at least preventedfrom unnecessary increase, and her mother and sisterswere spared much solicitude on her account.
Such behaviour as this, so exactly the reverseof her own, appeared no more meritorious to Marianne,than her own had seemed faulty to her.
The businessof self-command she settled very easily;--with strongaffections it was impossible, with calm ones it couldhave no merit.
That her sister's affections WERE calm,she dared not deny, though she blushed to acknowledge it;and of the strength of her own, she gave a very striking proof,by still loving and respecting that sister, in spiteof this mortifying conviction.
Without shutting herself up from her family,or leaving the house in determined solitude to avoid them,or lying awake the whole night to indulge meditation,Elinor found every day afforded her leisure enoughto think of Edward, and of Edward's behaviour, in everypossible variety which the different state of her spiritsat different times could produce,--with tenderness,pity, approbation, censure, and doubt.
There were momentsin abundance, when, if not by the absence of her motherand sisters, at least by the nature of their employments,conversation was forbidden among them, and every effectof solitude was produced.
Her mind was inevitablyat liberty; her thoughts could not be chained elsewhere;and the past and the future, on a subject so interesting,must be before her, must force her attention, and engrossher memory, her reflection, and her fancy.
From a reverie of this kind, as she sat at herdrawing-table, she was roused one morning, soon afterEdward's leaving them, by the arrival of company.
She happened to be quite alone.
The closing of thelittle gate, at the entrance of the green court in frontof the house, drew her eyes to the window, and she sawa large party walking up to the door.
Amongst themwere Sir John and Lady Middleton and Mrs. Jennings,but there were two others, a gentleman and lady, who werequite unknown to her.
She was sitting near the window,and as soon as Sir John perceived her, he left the restof the party to the ceremony of knocking at the door,and stepping across the turf, obliged her to open thecasement to speak to him, though the space was so shortbetween the door and the window, as to make it hardlypossible to speak at one without being heard at the other.
"Well," said he, "we have brought you some strangers.
How do you like them?"
"Hush!
they will hear you."
"Never mind if they do.
It is only the Palmers.
Charlotte is very pretty, I can tell you.
You may see herif you look this way."
As Elinor was certain of seeing her in a coupleof minutes, without taking that liberty, she beggedto be excused.
"Where is Marianne?
Has she run away because weare come?
I see her instrument is open."
"She is walking, I believe."
They were now joined by Mrs. Jennings, who had notpatience enough to wait till the door was opened beforeshe told HER story.
She came hallooing to the window,"How do you do, my dear?
How does Mrs. Dashwood do?
And where are your sisters?
What!
all alone!
youwill be glad of a little company to sit with you.
I have brought my other son and daughter to see you.
Only think of their coming so suddenly!
I thought I hearda carriage last night, while we were drinking our tea,but it never entered my head that it could be them.
I thought of nothing but whether it might not be ColonelBrandon come back again; so I said to Sir John, I do thinkI hear a carriage; perhaps it is Colonel Brandon comeback again"--Elinor was obliged to turn from her, in the middleof her story, to receive the rest of the party; LadyMiddleton introduced the two strangers; Mrs. Dashwoodand Margaret came down stairs at the same time, and theyall sat down to look at one another, while Mrs. Jenningscontinued her story as she walked through the passageinto the parlour, attended by Sir John.
Mrs. Palmer was several years younger than LadyMiddleton, and totally unlike her in every respect.
She was short and plump, had a very pretty face,and the finest expression of good humour in it that couldpossibly be.
Her manners were by no means so elegantas her sister's, but they were much more prepossessing.
She came in with a smile, smiled all the time of her visit,except when she laughed, and smiled when she went away.
Her husband was a grave looking young man of five or sixand twenty, with an air of more fashion and sense thanhis wife, but of less willingness to please or be pleased.
He entered the room with a look of self-consequence,slightly bowed to the ladies, without speaking a word,and, after briefly surveying them and their apartments,took up a newspaper from the table, and continued to read itas long as he staid.
Mrs. Palmer, on the contrary, who was strongly endowedby nature with a turn for being uniformly civil and happy,was hardly seated before her admiration of the parlourand every thing in it burst forth.
"Well!
what a delightful room this is!
I neversaw anything so charming!
Only think, Mamma, how itis improved since I was here last!
I always thought itsuch a sweet place, ma'am!
(turning to Mrs. Dashwood)but you have made it so charming!
Only look, sister,how delightful every thing is!
How I should like sucha house for myself!
Should not you, Mr.
Palmer?"
Mr. Palmer made her no answer, and did not even raisehis eyes from the newspaper.
"Mr. Palmer does not hear me," said she, laughing;"he never does sometimes.
It is so ridiculous!"
This was quite a new idea to Mrs. Dashwood; she hadnever been used to find wit in the inattention of any one,and could not help looking with surprise at them both.
Mrs. Jennings, in the meantime, talked on as loudas she could, and continued her account of their surprise,the evening before, on seeing their friends, withoutceasing till every thing was told.
Mrs. Palmer laughedheartily at the recollection of their astonishment,and every body agreed, two or three times over, that ithad been quite an agreeable surprise.
"You may believe how glad we all were to see them,"added Mrs. Jennings, leaning forward towards Elinor,and speaking in a low voice as if she meant to be heardby no one else, though they were seated on different sidesof the room; "but, however, I can't help wishing they hadnot travelled quite so fast, nor made such a long journeyof it, for they came all round by London upon accountof some business, for you know (nodding significantly andpointing to her daughter) it was wrong in her situation.
I wanted her to stay at home and rest this morning,but she would come with us; she longed so much to seeyou all!"
Mrs. Palmer laughed, and said it would not do herany harm.
"She expects to be confined in February,"continued Mrs. Jennings.
Lady Middleton could no longer endure such a conversation,and therefore exerted herself to ask Mr. Palmer if therewas any news in the paper.
"No, none at all," he replied, and read on.
"Here comes Marianne," cried Sir John.
"Now, Palmer,you shall see a monstrous pretty girl."
He immediately went into the passage, opened the front door,and ushered her in himself.
Mrs. Jennings asked her,as soon as she appeared, if she had not been to Allenham;and Mrs. Palmer laughed so heartily at the question,as to show she understood it.
Mr. Palmer looked upon her entering the room, stared at her some minutes,and then returned to his newspaper.
Mrs. Palmer's eyewas now caught by the drawings which hung round the room.
She got up to examine them.
"Oh!
dear, how beautiful these are!
Well!
how delightful!
Do but look, mama, how sweet!
I declare they are quite charming;I could look at them for ever."
And then sitting down again,she very soon forgot that there were any such things in the room.
When Lady Middleton rose to go away, Mr. Palmerrose also, laid down the newspaper, stretched himselfand looked at them all around.
"My love, have you been asleep?"
said his wife, laughing.
He made her no answer; and only observed, after againexamining the room, that it was very low pitched,and that the ceiling was crooked.
He then made his bow,and departed with the rest.
Sir John had been very urgent with them all tospend the next day at the park.
Mrs. Dashwood, who didnot chuse to dine with them oftener than they dinedat the cottage, absolutely refused on her own account;her daughters might do as they pleased.
But they had nocuriosity to see how Mr. and Mrs. Palmer ate their dinner,and no expectation of pleasure from them in any other way.
They attempted, therefore, likewise, to excuse themselves;the weather was uncertain, and not likely to be good.
But Sir John would not be satisfied--the carriage shouldbe sent for them and they must come.
Lady Middleton too,though she did not press their mother, pressed them.
Mrs. Jennings and Mrs. Palmer joined their entreaties, allseemed equally anxious to avoid a family party; and the youngladies were obliged to yield.
"Why should they ask us?"
said Marianne, as soon as theywere gone.
"The rent of this cottage is said to be low;but we have it on very hard terms, if we are to dineat the park whenever any one is staying either with them,or with us."
"They mean no less to be civil and kind to us now,"said Elinor, "by these frequent invitations, than bythose which we received from them a few weeks ago.
The alteration is not in them, if their parties are growntedious and dull.
We must look for the change elsewhere."
CHAPTER 20As the Miss Dashwoods entered the drawing-room of the parkthe next day, at one door, Mrs. Palmer came running in atthe other, looking as good humoured and merry as before.
She took them all most affectionately by the hand,and expressed great delight in seeing them again.
"I am so glad to see you!"
said she, seating herselfbetween Elinor and Marianne, "for it is so bad a day I wasafraid you might not come, which would be a shocking thing,as we go away again tomorrow.
We must go, for the Westonscome to us next week you know.
It was quite a sudden thingour coming at all, and I knew nothing of it till the carriagewas coming to the door, and then Mr. Palmer asked me if Iwould go with him to Barton.
He is so droll!
He nevertells me any thing!
I am so sorry we cannot stay longer;however we shall meet again in town very soon, I hope."
They were obliged to put an end to such an expectation.
"Not go to town!"
cried Mrs. Palmer, with a laugh,"I shall be quite disappointed if you do not.
I couldget the nicest house in world for you, next door to ours,in Hanover-square.
You must come, indeed.
I am sureI shall be very happy to chaperon you at any time tillI am confined, if Mrs. Dashwood should not like to gointo public."
They thanked her; but were obliged to resist allher entreaties.
"Oh, my love," cried Mrs. Palmer to her husband,who just then entered the room--"you must help me topersuade the Miss Dashwoods to go to town this winter."
Her love made no answer; and after slightly bowingto the ladies, began complaining of the weather.
"How horrid all this is!"
said he.
"Such weathermakes every thing and every body disgusting.
Dullnessis as much produced within doors as without, by rain.
It makes one detest all one's acquaintance.
What thedevil does Sir John mean by not having a billiard roomin his house?
How few people know what comfort is!
SirJohn is as stupid as the weather."
The rest of the company soon dropt in.
"I am afraid, Miss Marianne," said Sir John, "you havenot been able to take your usual walk to Allenham today."
Marianne looked very grave and said nothing.
"Oh, don't be so sly before us," said Mrs. Palmer;"for we know all about it, I assure you; and I admire yourtaste very much, for I think he is extremely handsome.
We do not live a great way from him in the country, you know.
Not above ten miles, I dare say."
"Much nearer thirty," said her husband.
"Ah, well!
there is not much difference.
I never was at his house; but they say it is a sweetpretty place."
"As vile a spot as I ever saw in my life,"said Mr. Palmer.
Marianne remained perfectly silent, though hercountenance betrayed her interest in what was said.
"Is it very ugly?"
continued Mrs. Palmer--"then itmust be some other place that is so pretty I suppose."
When they were seated in the dining room, Sir Johnobserved with regret that they were only eight all together.
"My dear," said he to his lady, "it is very provokingthat we should be so few.
Why did not you ask the Gilbertsto come to us today?"
"Did not I tell you, Sir John, when you spoke to meabout it before, that it could not be done?
They dinedwith us last."
"You and I, Sir John," said Mrs. Jennings,"should not stand upon such ceremony."
"Then you would be very ill-bred," cried Mr. Palmer.
"My love you contradict every body," said his wifewith her usual laugh.
"Do you know that you are quite rude?"
"I did not know I contradicted any body in callingyour mother ill-bred."
"Ay, you may abuse me as you please," said the good-naturedold lady, "you have taken Charlotte off my hands, and cannotgive her back again.
So there I have the whip hand of you."
Charlotte laughed heartily to think that herhusband could not get rid of her; and exultingly said,she did not care how cross he was to her, as they mustlive together.
It was impossible for any one to be morethoroughly good-natured, or more determined to be happythan Mrs. Palmer.
The studied indifference, insolence,and discontent of her husband gave her no pain;and when he scolded or abused her, she was highly diverted.
"Mr. Palmer is so droll!"
said she, in a whisper,to Elinor.
"He is always out of humour."
Elinor was not inclined, after a little observation,to give him credit for being so genuinely and unaffectedlyill-natured or ill-bred as he wished to appear.
His temper might perhaps be a little soured by finding,like many others of his sex, that through some unaccountablebias in favour of beauty, he was the husband of a very sillywoman,--but she knew that this kind of blunder was toocommon for any sensible man to be lastingly hurt by it.--It was rather a wish of distinction, she believed,which produced his contemptuous treatment of every body,and his general abuse of every thing before him.
It was the desire of appearing superior to other people.
The motive was too common to be wondered at; but the means,however they might succeed by establishing his superiorityin ill-breeding, were not likely to attach any one to himexcept his wife.
"Oh, my dear Miss Dashwood," said Mrs. Palmer soon afterwards,"I have got such a favour to ask of you and your sister.
Will you come and spend some time at Cleveland thisChristmas?
Now, pray do,--and come while the Westons arewith us.
You cannot think how happy I shall be!
It willbe quite delightful!--My love," applying to her husband,"don't you long to have the Miss Dashwoods come to Cleveland?"
"Certainly," he replied, with a sneer--"I cameinto Devonshire with no other view."
"There now,"--said his lady, "you see Mr. Palmerexpects you; so you cannot refuse to come."
They both eagerly and resolutely declined her invitation.
"But indeed you must and shall come.
I am sure youwill like it of all things.
The Westons will be with us,and it will be quite delightful.
You cannot thinkwhat a sweet place Cleveland is; and we are so gay now,for Mr. Palmer is always going about the country canvassingagainst the election; and so many people came to dinewith us that I never saw before, it is quite charming!
But,poor fellow!
it is very fatiguing to him!
for he is forcedto make every body like him."
Elinor could hardly keep her countenance as sheassented to the hardship of such an obligation.
"How charming it will be," said Charlotte, "when heis in Parliament!--won't it?
How I shall laugh!
It willbe so ridiculous to see all his letters directed to himwith an M.P.--But do you know, he says, he will never frankfor me?
He declares he won't.
Don't you, Mr.
Palmer?"
Mr. Palmer took no notice of her.
"He cannot bear writing, you know," she continued--"he says it is quite shocking."
"No," said he, "I never said any thing so irrational.
Don't palm all your abuses of languages upon me."
"There now; you see how droll he is.
This is alwaysthe way with him!
Sometimes he won't speak to me for halfa day together, and then he comes out with somethingso droll--all about any thing in the world."
She surprised Elinor very much as they returnedinto the drawing-room, by asking her whether she didnot like Mr. Palmer excessively.
"Certainly," said Elinor; "he seems very agreeable."
"Well--I am so glad you do.
I thought you would,he is so pleasant; and Mr. Palmer is excessively pleasedwith you and your sisters I can tell you, and you can'tthink how disappointed he will be if you don't cometo Cleveland.--I can't imagine why you should objectto it."
Elinor was again obliged to decline her invitation;and by changing the subject, put a stop to her entreaties.
She thought it probable that as they lived in thesame county, Mrs. Palmer might be able to give somemore particular account of Willoughby's generalcharacter, than could be gathered from the Middletons'partial acquaintance with him; and she was eager to gainfrom any one, such a confirmation of his merits as mightremove the possibility of fear from Marianne.
She beganby inquiring if they saw much of Mr. Willoughby at Cleveland,and whether they were intimately acquainted with him.
"Oh dear, yes; I know him extremely well,"replied Mrs. Palmer;--"Not that I ever spoketo him, indeed; but I have seen him for ever in town.
Somehow or other I never happened to be staying at Bartonwhile he was at Allenham.
Mama saw him here once before;--but I was with my uncle at Weymouth.
However, I dare saywe should have seen a great deal of him in Somersetshire,if it had not happened very unluckily that we should neverhave been in the country together.
He is very littleat Combe, I believe; but if he were ever so much there,I do not think Mr. Palmer would visit him, for he isin the opposition, you know, and besides it is such away off.
I know why you inquire about him, very well;your sister is to marry him.
I am monstrous glad of it,for then I shall have her for a neighbour you know."
"Upon my word," replied Elinor, "you know muchmore of the matter than I do, if you have any reasonto expect such a match."
"Don't pretend to deny it, because you know it iswhat every body talks of.
I assure you I heard of itin my way through town."
"My dear Mrs.
Palmer!"
"Upon my honour I did.--I met Colonel BrandonMonday morning in Bond-street, just before we left town,and he told me of it directly."
"You surprise me very much.
Colonel Brandon tellyou of it!
Surely you must be mistaken.
To give suchintelligence to a person who could not be interested in it,even if it were true, is not what I should expect ColonelBrandon to do."
"But I do assure you it was so, for all that,and I will tell you how it happened.
When we met him,he turned back and walked with us; and so we began talkingof my brother and sister, and one thing and another,and I said to him, 'So, Colonel, there is a new familycome to Barton cottage, I hear, and mama sends me wordthey are very pretty, and that one of them is going to bemarried to Mr. Willoughby of Combe Magna.
Is it true,pray?
for of course you must know, as you have been inDevonshire so lately.'"
"And what did the Colonel say?"
"Oh--he did not say much; but he looked as if heknew it to be true, so from that moment I set it downas certain.
It will be quite delightful, I declare!
When is it to take place?"
"Mr. Brandon was very well I hope?"
"Oh!
yes, quite well; and so full of your praises,he did nothing but say fine things of you."
"I am flattered by his commendation.
He seemsan excellent man; and I think him uncommonly pleasing."
"So do I.--He is such a charming man, that itis quite a pity he should be so grave and so dull.
Mamma says HE was in love with your sister too.--I assure you it was a great compliment if he was, for hehardly ever falls in love with any body."
"Is Mr. Willoughby much known in your partof Somersetshire?"
said Elinor.
"Oh!
yes, extremely well; that is, I do not believemany people are acquainted with him, because Combe Magnais so far off; but they all think him extremely agreeableI assure you.
Nobody is more liked than Mr. Willoughbywherever he goes, and so you may tell your sister.
She is a monstrous lucky girl to get him, upon my honour;not but that he is much more lucky in getting her,because she is so very handsome and agreeable, that nothingcan be good enough for her.
However, I don't thinkher hardly at all handsomer than you, I assure you;for I think you both excessively pretty, and so doesMr. Palmer too I am sure, though we could not get himto own it last night."
Mrs. Palmer's information respecting Willoughbywas not very material; but any testimony in his favour,however small, was pleasing to her.
"I am so glad we are got acquainted at last,"continued Charlotte.--"And now I hope we shall always begreat friends.
You can't think how much I longed to see you!
It is so delightful that you should live at the cottage!
Nothing can be like it, to be sure!
And I am so gladyour sister is going to be well married!
I hope you willbe a great deal at Combe Magna.
It is a sweet place,by all accounts."
"You have been long acquainted with Colonel Brandon,have not you?"
"Yes, a great while; ever since my sister married.--He was a particular friend of Sir John's.
I believe,"she added in a low voice, "he would have been veryglad to have had me, if he could.
Sir John and LadyMiddleton wished it very much.
But mama did not thinkthe match good enough for me, otherwise Sir John wouldhave mentioned it to the Colonel, and we should have beenmarried immediately."
"Did not Colonel Brandon know of Sir John's proposalto your mother before it was made?
Had he never ownedhis affection to yourself?"
"Oh, no; but if mama had not objected to it,I dare say he would have liked it of all things.
He had not seen me then above twice, for it was beforeI left school.
However, I am much happier as I am.
Mr. Palmer is the kind of man I like."
CHAPTER 21The Palmers returned to Cleveland the next day,and the two families at Barton were again left to entertaineach other.
But this did not last long; Elinor had hardlygot their last visitors out of her head, had hardly donewondering at Charlotte's being so happy without a cause,at Mr. Palmer's acting so simply, with good abilities,and at the strange unsuitableness which often existed betweenhusband and wife, before Sir John's and Mrs. Jennings'sactive zeal in the cause of society, procured her someother new acquaintance to see and observe.
In a morning's excursion to Exeter, they had met withtwo young ladies, whom Mrs. Jennings had the satisfactionof discovering to be her relations, and this was enoughfor Sir John to invite them directly to the park,as soon as their present engagements at Exeter were over.
Their engagements at Exeter instantly gave way beforesuch an invitation, and Lady Middleton was thrown intono little alarm on the return of Sir John, by hearingthat she was very soon to receive a visit from two girlswhom she had never seen in her life, and of whose elegance,--whose tolerable gentility even, she could have no proof;for the assurances of her husband and mother on that subjectwent for nothing at all.
Their being her relations toomade it so much the worse; and Mrs. Jennings's attemptsat consolation were therefore unfortunately founded,when she advised her daughter not to care about their beingso fashionable; because they were all cousins and must putup with one another.
As it was impossible, however, now toprevent their coming, Lady Middleton resigned herself to theidea of it, with all the philosophy of a well-bred woman,contenting herself with merely giving her husband a gentlereprimand on the subject five or six times every day.
The young ladies arrived: their appearance was byno means ungenteel or unfashionable.
Their dress wasvery smart, their manners very civil, they were delightedwith the house, and in raptures with the furniture,and they happened to be so doatingly fond of childrenthat Lady Middleton's good opinion was engaged in theirfavour before they had been an hour at the Park.
She declared them to be very agreeable girls indeed,which for her ladyship was enthusiastic admiration.
Sir John's confidence in his own judgment rose with thisanimated praise, and he set off directly for the cottageto tell the Miss Dashwoods of the Miss Steeles' arrival,and to assure them of their being the sweetest girlsin the world.
From such commendation as this, however,there was not much to be learned; Elinor well knewthat the sweetest girls in the world were to be metwith in every part of England, under every possiblevariation of form, face, temper and understanding.
Sir John wanted the whole family to walk to the Park directlyand look at his guests.
Benevolent, philanthropic man!
Itwas painful to him even to keep a third cousin to himself.
"Do come now," said he--"pray come--you must come--Ideclare you shall come--You can't think how you willlike them.
Lucy is monstrous pretty, and so good humouredand agreeable!
The children are all hanging about her already,as if she was an old acquaintance.
And they both longto see you of all things, for they have heard at Exeterthat you are the most beautiful creatures in the world;and I have told them it is all very true, and a greatdeal more.
You will be delighted with them I am sure.
They have brought the whole coach full of playthingsfor the children.
How can you be so cross as not to come?
Why they are your cousins, you know, after a fashion.
YOU are my cousins, and they are my wife's, so you mustbe related."
But Sir John could not prevail.
He could only obtaina promise of their calling at the Park within a day or two,and then left them in amazement at their indifference,to walk home and boast anew of their attractions to theMiss Steeles, as he had been already boasting of the MissSteeles to them.
When their promised visit to the Park and consequentintroduction to these young ladies took place, they foundin the appearance of the eldest, who was nearly thirty,with a very plain and not a sensible face, nothing to admire;but in the other, who was not more than two or threeand twenty, they acknowledged considerable beauty; herfeatures were pretty, and she had a sharp quick eye,and a smartness of air, which though it did not giveactual elegance or grace, gave distinction to her person.--Their manners were particularly civil, and Elinor soonallowed them credit for some kind of sense, when shesaw with what constant and judicious attention theywere making themselves agreeable to Lady Middleton.
With her children they were in continual raptures,extolling their beauty, courting their notice, and humouringtheir whims; and such of their time as could be spared fromthe importunate demands which this politeness made on it,was spent in admiration of whatever her ladyship was doing,if she happened to be doing any thing, or in taking patternsof some elegant new dress, in which her appearancethe day before had thrown them into unceasing delight.
Fortunately for those who pay their court throughsuch foibles, a fond mother, though, in pursuit of praisefor her children, the most rapacious of human beings,is likewise the most credulous; her demands are exorbitant;but she will swallow any thing; and the excessiveaffection and endurance of the Miss Steeles towardsher offspring were viewed therefore by Lady Middletonwithout the smallest surprise or distrust.
She saw withmaternal complacency all the impertinent encroachmentsand mischievous tricks to which her cousins submitted.
She saw their sashes untied, their hair pulled abouttheir ears, their work-bags searched, and their knivesand scissors stolen away, and felt no doubt of its beinga reciprocal enjoyment.
It suggested no other surprisethan that Elinor and Marianne should sit so composedly by,without claiming a share in what was passing.
"John is in such spirits today!"
said she, on histaking Miss Steeles's pocket handkerchief, and throwingit out of window--"He is full of monkey tricks."
And soon afterwards, on the second boy's violentlypinching one of the same lady's fingers, she fondly observed,"How playful William is!"
"And here is my sweet little Annamaria," she added,tenderly caressing a little girl of three years old,who had not made a noise for the last two minutes;"And she is always so gentle and quiet--Never was theresuch a quiet little thing!"
But unfortunately in bestowing these embraces,a pin in her ladyship's head dress slightly scratchingthe child's neck, produced from this pattern of gentlenesssuch violent screams, as could hardly be outdone by anycreature professedly noisy.
The mother's consternationwas excessive; but it could not surpass the alarm of theMiss Steeles, and every thing was done by all three,in so critical an emergency, which affection could suggestas likely to assuage the agonies of the little sufferer.
She was seated in her mother's lap, covered with kisses,her wound bathed with lavender-water, by one of theMiss Steeles, who was on her knees to attend her,and her mouth stuffed with sugar plums by the other.
With such a reward for her tears, the child was too wiseto cease crying.
She still screamed and sobbed lustily,kicked her two brothers for offering to touch her, and alltheir united soothings were ineffectual till Lady Middletonluckily remembering that in a scene of similar distresslast week, some apricot marmalade had been successfullyapplied for a bruised temple, the same remedy was eagerlyproposed for this unfortunate scratch, and a slightintermission of screams in the young lady on hearing it,gave them reason to hope that it would not be rejected.--She was carried out of the room therefore in hermother's arms, in quest of this medicine, and as thetwo boys chose to follow, though earnestly entreatedby their mother to stay behind, the four young ladieswere left in a quietness which the room had not known formany hours.
"Poor little creatures!"
said Miss Steele, as soonas they were gone.
"It might have been a very sad accident."
"Yet I hardly know how," cried Marianne, "unless ithad been under totally different circumstances.
But this is the usual way of heightening alarm, where thereis nothing to be alarmed at in reality."
"What a sweet woman Lady Middleton is!"
said Lucy Steele.
Marianne was silent; it was impossible for her to saywhat she did not feel, however trivial the occasion;and upon Elinor therefore the whole task of telling lieswhen politeness required it, always fell.
She did herbest when thus called on, by speaking of Lady Middletonwith more warmth than she felt, though with far less thanMiss Lucy.
"And Sir John too," cried the elder sister,"what a charming man he is!"
Here too, Miss Dashwood's commendation, being onlysimple and just, came in without any eclat.
She merelyobserved that he was perfectly good humoured and friendly.
"And what a charming little family they have!
Inever saw such fine children in my life.--I declare Iquite doat upon them already, and indeed I am alwaysdistractedly fond of children."
"I should guess so," said Elinor, with a smile,"from what I have witnessed this morning."
"I have a notion," said Lucy, "you think the littleMiddletons rather too much indulged; perhaps they may be theoutside of enough; but it is so natural in Lady Middleton;and for my part, I love to see children full of lifeand spirits; I cannot bear them if they are tame and quiet."
"I confess," replied Elinor, "that while I am atBarton Park, I never think of tame and quiet childrenwith any abhorrence."
A short pause succeeded this speech, which was firstbroken by Miss Steele, who seemed very much disposedfor conversation, and who now said rather abruptly,"And how do you like Devonshire, Miss Dashwood?
I supposeyou were very sorry to leave Sussex."
In some surprise at the familiarity of this question,or at least of the manner in which it was spoken,Elinor replied that she was.
"Norland is a prodigious beautiful place, is not it?"
added Miss Steele.
"We have heard Sir John admire it excessively,"said Lucy, who seemed to think some apology necessaryfor the freedom of her sister.
"I think every one MUST admire it," replied Elinor,"who ever saw the place; though it is not to be supposedthat any one can estimate its beauties as we do."
"And had you a great many smart beaux there?
Isuppose you have not so many in this part of the world;for my part, I think they are a vast addition always."
"But why should you think," said Lucy, looking ashamedof her sister, "that there are not as many genteel youngmen in Devonshire as Sussex?"
"Nay, my dear, I'm sure I don't pretend to say that therean't.
I'm sure there's a vast many smart beaux in Exeter;but you know, how could I tell what smart beaux theremight be about Norland; and I was only afraid the MissDashwoods might find it dull at Barton, if they had notso many as they used to have.
But perhaps you young ladiesmay not care about the beaux, and had as lief be withoutthem as with them.
For my part, I think they are vastlyagreeable, provided they dress smart and behave civil.
But I can't bear to see them dirty and nasty.
Now there'sMr. Rose at Exeter, a prodigious smart young man,quite a beau, clerk to Mr. Simpson, you know, and yet if youdo but meet him of a morning, he is not fit to be seen.--I suppose your brother was quite a beau, Miss Dashwood,before he married, as he was so rich?"
"Upon my word," replied Elinor, "I cannot tell you,for I do not perfectly comprehend the meaning of the word.
But this I can say, that if he ever was a beau beforehe married, he is one still for there is not the smallestalteration in him."
"Oh!
dear!
one never thinks of married men's beingbeaux--they have something else to do."
"Lord!
Anne," cried her sister, "you can talk ofnothing but beaux;--you will make Miss Dashwood believe youthink of nothing else."
And then to turn the discourse,she began admiring the house and the furniture.
This specimen of the Miss Steeles was enough.
The vulgar freedom and folly of the eldest lefther no recommendation, and as Elinor was not blindedby the beauty, or the shrewd look of the youngest,to her want of real elegance and artlessness, she leftthe house without any wish of knowing them better.
Not so the Miss Steeles.--They came from Exeter, wellprovided with admiration for the use of Sir John Middleton,his family, and all his relations, and no niggardlyproportion was now dealt out to his fair cousins, whom theydeclared to be the most beautiful, elegant, accomplished,and agreeable girls they had ever beheld, and with whomthey were particularly anxious to be better acquainted.--And to be better acquainted therefore, Elinor soon foundwas their inevitable lot, for as Sir John was entirelyon the side of the Miss Steeles, their party would betoo strong for opposition, and that kind of intimacymust be submitted to, which consists of sitting an houror two together in the same room almost every day.
Sir John could do no more; but he did not know that anymore was required: to be together was, in his opinion,to be intimate, and while his continual schemes for theirmeeting were effectual, he had not a doubt of their beingestablished friends.
To do him justice, he did every thing in his powerto promote their unreserve, by making the Miss Steelesacquainted with whatever he knew or supposed of his cousins'situations in the most delicate particulars,--and Elinorhad not seen them more than twice, before the eldest ofthem wished her joy on her sister's having been so luckyas to make a conquest of a very smart beau since shecame to Barton.
"'Twill be a fine thing to have her married so youngto be sure," said she, "and I hear he is quite a beau,and prodigious handsome.
And I hope you may have as goodluck yourself soon,--but perhaps you may have a friendin the corner already."
Elinor could not suppose that Sir John would be morenice in proclaiming his suspicions of her regard for Edward,than he had been with respect to Marianne; indeed it wasrather his favourite joke of the two, as being somewhatnewer and more conjectural; and since Edward's visit,they had never dined together without his drinking to herbest affections with so much significancy and so many nodsand winks, as to excite general attention.
The letter F--had been likewise invariably brought forward, and foundproductive of such countless jokes, that its characteras the wittiest letter in the alphabet had been longestablished with Elinor.
The Miss Steeles, as she expected, had now all thebenefit of these jokes, and in the eldest of them theyraised a curiosity to know the name of the gentlemanalluded to, which, though often impertinently expressed,was perfectly of a piece with her general inquisitivenessinto the concerns of their family.
But Sir John did notsport long with the curiosity which he delighted to raise,for he had at least as much pleasure in telling the name,as Miss Steele had in hearing it.
"His name is Ferrars," said he, in a very audible whisper;"but pray do not tell it, for it's a great secret."
"Ferrars!"
repeated Miss Steele; "Mr. Ferrars isthe happy man, is he?
What!
your sister-in-law's brother,Miss Dashwood?
a very agreeable young man to be sure;I know him very well."
"How can you say so, Anne?"
cried Lucy, who generallymade an amendment to all her sister's assertions.
"Though we have seen him once or twice at my uncle's, itis rather too much to pretend to know him very well."
Elinor heard all this with attention and surprise.
"And who was this uncle?
Where did he live?
How camethey acquainted?"
She wished very much to have the subjectcontinued, though she did not chuse to join in it herself;but nothing more of it was said, and for the first timein her life, she thought Mrs. Jennings deficient eitherin curiosity after petty information, or in a dispositionto communicate it.
The manner in which Miss Steele hadspoken of Edward, increased her curiosity; for it struckher as being rather ill-natured, and suggested the suspicionof that lady's knowing, or fancying herself to know somethingto his disadvantage.--But her curiosity was unavailing,for no farther notice was taken of Mr. Ferrars's name byMiss Steele when alluded to, or even openly mentioned by SirJohn.
CHAPTER 22Marianne, who had never much toleration for anything like impertinence, vulgarity, inferiority of parts,or even difference of taste from herself, was atthis time particularly ill-disposed, from the stateof her spirits, to be pleased with the Miss Steeles,or to encourage their advances; and to the invariablecoldness of her behaviour towards them, which checked everyendeavour at intimacy on their side, Elinor principallyattributed that preference of herself which soon becameevident in the manners of both, but especially of Lucy,who missed no opportunity of engaging her in conversation,or of striving to improve their acquaintance by an easyand frank communication of her sentiments.
Lucy was naturally clever; her remarks were oftenjust and amusing; and as a companion for half an hourElinor frequently found her agreeable; but her powershad received no aid from education: she was ignorantand illiterate; and her deficiency of all mental improvement,her want of information in the most common particulars,could not be concealed from Miss Dashwood, in spite of herconstant endeavour to appear to advantage.
Elinor saw,and pitied her for, the neglect of abilities which educationmight have rendered so respectable; but she saw, with lesstenderness of feeling, the thorough want of delicacy,of rectitude, and integrity of mind, which her attentions,her assiduities, her flatteries at the Park betrayed;and she could have no lasting satisfaction in the companyof a person who joined insincerity with ignorance;whose want of instruction prevented their meetingin conversation on terms of equality, and whose conducttoward others made every shew of attention and deferencetowards herself perfectly valueless.
"You will think my question an odd one, I dare say,"said Lucy to her one day, as they were walking togetherfrom the park to the cottage--"but pray, are youpersonally acquainted with your sister-in-law's mother,Mrs.
Ferrars?"
Elinor DID think the question a very odd one,and her countenance expressed it, as she answered that shehad never seen Mrs. Ferrars.
"Indeed!"
replied Lucy; "I wonder at that, for Ithought you must have seen her at Norland sometimes.
Then, perhaps, you cannot tell me what sort of a womanshe is?"
"No," returned Elinor, cautious of giving her realopinion of Edward's mother, and not very desirousof satisfying what seemed impertinent curiosity--"I know nothing of her."
"I am sure you think me very strange, for enquiringabout her in such a way," said Lucy, eyeing Elinor attentivelyas she spoke; "but perhaps there may be reasons--I wishI might venture; but however I hope you will do me the justiceof believing that I do not mean to be impertinent."
Elinor made her a civil reply, and they walked onfor a few minutes in silence.
It was broken by Lucy,who renewed the subject again by saying, with somehesitation,"I cannot bear to have you think me impertinently curious.
I am sure I would rather do any thing in the world than bethought so by a person whose good opinion is so well worthhaving as yours.
And I am sure I should not have the smallestfear of trusting YOU; indeed, I should be very glad of youradvice how to manage in such and uncomfortable situationas I am; but, however, there is no occasion to trouble YOU.
I am sorry you do not happen to know Mrs.
Ferrars."
"I am sorry I do NOT," said Elinor, in great astonishment,"if it could be of any use to YOU to know my opinion of her.
But really I never understood that you were at all connectedwith that family, and therefore I am a little surprised,I confess, at so serious an inquiry into her character."
"I dare say you are, and I am sure I do not at allwonder at it.
But if I dared tell you all, you would not beso much surprised.
Mrs. Ferrars is certainly nothing to meat present--but the time MAY come--how soon it will comemust depend upon herself--when we may be very intimatelyconnected."
She looked down as she said this, amiably bashful,with only one side glance at her companion to observe itseffect on her.
"Good heavens!"
cried Elinor, "what do you mean?
Are you acquainted with Mr. Robert Ferrars?
Can you be?"
And she did not feel much delighted with the idea of sucha sister-in-law.
"No," replied Lucy, "not to Mr. ROBERT Ferrars--Inever saw him in my life; but," fixing her eyes upon Elinor,"to his eldest brother."
What felt Elinor at that moment?
Astonishment,that would have been as painful as it was strong, had notan immediate disbelief of the assertion attended it.
She turned towards Lucy in silent amazement, unable to divinethe reason or object of such a declaration; and thoughher complexion varied, she stood firm in incredulity,and felt in no danger of an hysterical fit, or a swoon.
"You may well be surprised," continued Lucy;"for to be sure you could have had no idea of it before;for I dare say he never dropped the smallest hint of itto you or any of your family; because it was always meantto be a great secret, and I am sure has been faithfullykept so by me to this hour.
Not a soul of all my relationsknow of it but Anne, and I never should have mentionedit to you, if I had not felt the greatest dependencein the world upon your secrecy; and I really thought mybehaviour in asking so many questions about Mrs. Ferrarsmust seem so odd, that it ought to be explained.
And I do not think Mr. Ferrars can be displeased,when he knows I have trusted you, because I know he hasthe highest opinion in the world of all your family,and looks upon yourself and the other Miss Dashwoods quiteas his own sisters."
--She paused.
Elinor for a few moments remained silent.
Her astonishment at what she heard was at first toogreat for words; but at length forcing herself to speak,and to speak cautiously, she said, with calmness of manner,which tolerably well concealed her surprise and solicitude--"May I ask if your engagement is of long standing?"
"We have been engaged these four years."
"Four years!"
"Yes."
Elinor, though greatly shocked, still felt unableto believe it.
"I did not know," said she, "that you were evenacquainted till the other day."
"Our acquaintance, however, is of many years date.
He was under my uncle's care, you know, a considerable while."
"Your uncle!"
"Yes; Mr. Pratt.
Did you never hear him talkof Mr.
Pratt?"
"I think I have," replied Elinor, with an exertionof spirits, which increased with her increase of emotion.
"He was four years with my uncle, who lives at Longstaple,near Plymouth.
It was there our acquaintance begun,for my sister and me was often staying with my uncle,and it was there our engagement was formed, though not tilla year after he had quitted as a pupil; but he was almostalways with us afterwards.
I was very unwilling to enterinto it, as you may imagine, without the knowledge andapprobation of his mother; but I was too young, and lovedhim too well, to be so prudent as I ought to have been.--Though you do not know him so well as me, Miss Dashwood,you must have seen enough of him to be sensible he isvery capable of making a woman sincerely attached to him."
"Certainly," answered Elinor, without knowing whatshe said; but after a moment's reflection, she added,with revived security of Edward's honour and love,and her companion's falsehood--"Engaged to Mr. EdwardFerrars!--I confess myself so totally surprised atwhat you tell me, that really--I beg your pardon;but surely there must be some mistake of person or name.
We cannot mean the same Mr.
Ferrars."
"We can mean no other," cried Lucy, smiling.
"Mr. EdwardFerrars, the eldest son of Mrs. Ferrars, of Park Street,and brother of your sister-in-law, Mrs. John Dashwood,is the person I mean; you must allow that I am not likelyto be deceived as to the name of the man on who all my happinessdepends."
"It is strange," replied Elinor, in a most painful perplexity,"that I should never have heard him even mention your name."
"No; considering our situation, it was not strange.
Our first care has been to keep the matter secret.--You knew nothing of me, or my family, and, therefore,there could be no OCCASION for ever mentioning my nameto you; and, as he was always particularly afraid of hissister's suspecting any thing, THAT was reason enoughfor his not mentioning it."
She was silent.--Elinor's security sunk; but herself-command did not sink with it.
"Four years you have been engaged," said shewith a firm voice.
"Yes; and heaven knows how much longer we may haveto wait.
Poor Edward!
It puts him quite out of heart."
Then taking a small miniature from her pocket, she added,"To prevent the possibility of mistake, be so good as to lookat this face.
It does not do him justice, to be sure,but yet I think you cannot be deceived as to the personit was drew for.--I have had it above these three years."
She put it into her hands as she spoke; and when Elinorsaw the painting, whatever other doubts her fear of atoo hasty decision, or her wish of detecting falsehoodmight suffer to linger in her mind, she could have none ofits being Edward's face.
She returned it almost instantly,acknowledging the likeness.
"I have never been able," continued Lucy, "to givehim my picture in return, which I am very much vexed at,for he has been always so anxious to get it!
But I amdetermined to set for it the very first opportunity."
"You are quite in the right," replied Elinor calmly.
They then proceeded a few paces in silence.
Lucy spoke first.
"I am sure," said she, "I have no doubt in the worldof your faithfully keeping this secret, because you mustknow of what importance it is to us, not to have it reachhis mother; for she would never approve of it, I dare say.
I shall have no fortune, and I fancy she is an exceedingproud woman."
"I certainly did not seek your confidence," said Elinor;"but you do me no more than justice in imagining that Imay be depended on.
Your secret is safe with me;but pardon me if I express some surprise at so unnecessarya communication.
You must at least have felt that mybeing acquainted with it could not add to its safety."
As she said this, she looked earnestly at Lucy,hoping to discover something in her countenance; perhaps thefalsehood of the greatest part of what she had been saying;but Lucy's countenance suffered no change.
"I was afraid you would think I was taking a greatliberty with you," said she, "in telling you all this.
I have not known you long to be sure, personally at least,but I have known you and all your family by descriptiona great while; and as soon as I saw you, I felt almost as ifyou was an old acquaintance.
Besides in the present case,I really thought some explanation was due to you after mymaking such particular inquiries about Edward's mother;and I am so unfortunate, that I have not a creature whoseadvice I can ask.
Anne is the only person that knows of it,and she has no judgment at all; indeed, she does me a greatdeal more harm than good, for I am in constant fear of herbetraying me.
She does not know how to hold her tongue,as you must perceive, and I am sure I was in the greatestfright in the world t'other day, when Edward's name wasmentioned by Sir John, lest she should out with it all.
You can't think how much I go through in my mind fromit altogether.
I only wonder that I am alive after whatI have suffered for Edward's sake these last four years.
Every thing in such suspense and uncertainty; and seeinghim so seldom--we can hardly meet above twice a-year.
I am sure I wonder my heart is not quite broke."
Here she took out her handkerchief; but Elinor didnot feel very compassionate.
"Sometimes."
continued Lucy, after wiping her eyes,"I think whether it would not be better for us bothto break off the matter entirely."
As she said this,she looked directly at her companion.
"But thenat other times I have not resolution enough for it.--I cannot bear the thoughts of making him so miserable,as I know the very mention of such a thing would do.
And on my own account too--so dear as he is to me--I don'tthink I could be equal to it.
What would you adviseme to do in such a case, Miss Dashwood?
What would youdo yourself?"
"Pardon me," replied Elinor, startled by the question;"but I can give you no advice under such circumstances.
Your own judgment must direct you."
"To be sure," continued Lucy, after a few minutessilence on both sides, "his mother must provide for himsometime or other; but poor Edward is so cast down by it!
Did you not think him dreadful low-spirited when he was atBarton?
He was so miserable when he left us at Longstaple,to go to you, that I was afraid you would think him quite ill.""Did he come from your uncle's, then, when he visited us?"
"Oh, yes; he had been staying a fortnight with us.
Did you think he came directly from town?"
"No," replied Elinor, most feelingly sensible ofevery fresh circumstance in favour of Lucy's veracity;"I remember he told us, that he had been stayinga fortnight with some friends near Plymouth."
She remembered too, her own surprise at the time,at his mentioning nothing farther of those friends,at his total silence with respect even to their names.
"Did not you think him sadly out of spirits?"
repeated Lucy.
"We did, indeed, particularly so when he first arrived."
"I begged him to exert himself for fear youshould suspect what was the matter; but it made himso melancholy, not being able to stay more than afortnight with us, and seeing me so much affected.--Poor fellow!--I am afraid it is just the same with him now;for he writes in wretched spirits.
I heard from him justbefore I left Exeter;" taking a letter from her pocketand carelessly showing the direction to Elinor.
"You know his hand, I dare say, a charming one it is;but that is not written so well as usual.--He was tired,I dare say, for he had just filled the sheet to me as fullas possible."
Elinor saw that it WAS his hand, and she could doubtno longer.
This picture, she had allowed herself to believe,might have been accidentally obtained; it might not havebeen Edward's gift; but a correspondence between themby letter, could subsist only under a positive engagement,could be authorised by nothing else; for a few moments, shewas almost overcome--her heart sunk within her, and she couldhardly stand; but exertion was indispensably necessary;and she struggled so resolutely against the oppressionof her feelings, that her success was speedy, and forthe time complete.
"Writing to each other," said Lucy, returning theletter into her pocket, "is the only comfort we havein such long separations.
Yes, I have one other comfortin his picture, but poor Edward has not even THAT.
If he had but my picture, he says he should be easy.
I gave him a lock of my hair set in a ring when he was atLongstaple last, and that was some comfort to him, he said,but not equal to a picture.
Perhaps you might noticethe ring when you saw him?"
"I did," said Elinor, with a composure of voice,under which was concealed an emotion and distress beyondany thing she had ever felt before.
She was mortified,shocked, confounded.
Fortunately for her, they had now reached the cottage,and the conversation could be continued no farther.
After sitting with them a few minutes, the Miss Steelesreturned to the Park, and Elinor was then at libertyto think and be wretched.
[At this point in the first and second editions, Volume 1 ends.]
CHAPTER 23However small Elinor's general dependence onLucy's veracity might be, it was impossible for heron serious reflection to suspect it in the present case,where no temptation could be answerable to the follyof inventing a falsehood of such a description.
What Lucyhad asserted to be true, therefore, Elinor could not,dared not longer doubt; supported as it was too on everyside by such probabilities and proofs, and contradictedby nothing but her own wishes.
Their opportunity ofacquaintance in the house of Mr. Pratt was a foundationfor the rest, at once indisputable and alarming; and Edward'svisit near Plymouth, his melancholy state of mind,his dissatisfaction at his own prospects, his uncertainbehaviour towards herself, the intimate knowledge of theMiss Steeles as to Norland and their family connections,which had often surprised her, the picture, the letter,the ring, formed altogether such a body of evidence,as overcame every fear of condemning him unfairly,and established as a fact, which no partiality couldset aside, his ill-treatment of herself.--Her resentmentof such behaviour, her indignation at having been its dupe,for a short time made her feel only for herself;but other ideas, other considerations, soon arose.
Had Edward been intentionally deceiving her?
Had he feigneda regard for her which he did not feel?
Was his engagementto Lucy an engagement of the heart?
No; whatever it mightonce have been, she could not believe it such at present.
His affection was all her own.
She could not be deceivedin that.
Her mother, sisters, Fanny, all had beenconscious of his regard for her at Norland; it was notan illusion of her own vanity.
He certainly loved her.
What a softener of the heart was this persuasion!
How muchcould it not tempt her to forgive!
He had been blamable,highly blamable, in remaining at Norland after he firstfelt her influence over him to be more than it oughtto be.
In that, he could not be defended; but if hehad injured her, how much more had he injured himself;if her case were pitiable, his was hopeless.
His imprudence had made her miserable for a while; but itseemed to have deprived himself of all chance of everbeing otherwise.
She might in time regain tranquillity;but HE, what had he to look forward to?
Could heever be tolerably happy with Lucy Steele; could he,were his affection for herself out of the question,with his integrity, his delicacy, and well-informed mind,be satisfied with a wife like her--illiterate, artful,and selfish?
The youthful infatuation of nineteen would naturallyblind him to every thing but her beauty and good nature;but the four succeeding years--years, which if rationallyspent, give such improvement to the understanding, musthave opened his eyes to her defects of education,while the same period of time, spent on her sidein inferior society and more frivolous pursuits,had perhaps robbed her of that simplicity which mightonce have given an interesting character to her beauty.
If in the supposition of his seeking to marry herself,his difficulties from his mother had seemed great,how much greater were they now likely to be, whenthe object of his engagement was undoubtedly inferiorin connections, and probably inferior in fortune to herself.
These difficulties, indeed, with a heart so alienatedfrom Lucy, might not press very hard upon his patience;but melancholy was the state of the person by whom theexpectation of family opposition and unkindness, couldbe felt as a relief!
As these considerations occurred to her in painfulsuccession, she wept for him, more than for herself.
Supported by the conviction of having done nothing tomerit her present unhappiness, and consoled by the beliefthat Edward had done nothing to forfeit her esteem,she thought she could even now, under the first smartof the heavy blow, command herself enough to guard everysuspicion of the truth from her mother and sisters.
And so well was she able to answer her own expectations,that when she joined them at dinner only two hoursafter she had first suffered the extinction of all herdearest hopes, no one would have supposed from theappearance of the sisters, that Elinor was mourningin secret over obstacles which must divide her for everfrom the object of her love, and that Marianne wasinternally dwelling on the perfections of a man, of whosewhole heart she felt thoroughly possessed, and whom sheexpected to see in every carriage which drove near their house.
The necessity of concealing from her mother andMarianne, what had been entrusted in confidence to herself,though it obliged her to unceasing exertion, was noaggravation of Elinor's distress.
On the contraryit was a relief to her, to be spared the communicationof what would give such affliction to them, and to besaved likewise from hearing that condemnation of Edward,which would probably flow from the excess of their partialaffection for herself, and which was more than she feltequal to support.
From their counsel, or their conversation, she knewshe could receive no assistance, their tenderness andsorrow must add to her distress, while her self-commandwould neither receive encouragement from their examplenor from their praise.
She was stronger alone,and her own good sense so well supported her, that herfirmness was as unshaken, her appearance of cheerfulnessas invariable, as with regrets so poignant and so fresh,it was possible for them to be.
Much as she had suffered from her first conversationwith Lucy on the subject, she soon felt an earnest wishof renewing it; and this for more reasons than one.
She wanted to hear many particulars of their engagementrepeated again, she wanted more clearly to understandwhat Lucy really felt for Edward, whether there were anysincerity in her declaration of tender regard for him,and she particularly wanted to convince Lucy, by herreadiness to enter on the matter again, and her calmnessin conversing on it, that she was no otherwise interestedin it than as a friend, which she very much fearedher involuntary agitation, in their morning discourse,must have left at least doubtful.
That Lucy was disposedto be jealous of her appeared very probable: it was plainthat Edward had always spoken highly in her praise,not merely from Lucy's assertion, but from her venturingto trust her on so short a personal acquaintance,with a secret so confessedly and evidently important.
And even Sir John's joking intelligence must have hadsome weight.
But indeed, while Elinor remained so wellassured within herself of being really beloved by Edward,it required no other consideration of probabilitiesto make it natural that Lucy should be jealous;and that she was so, her very confidence was a proof.
What other reason for the disclosure of the affair couldthere be, but that Elinor might be informed by it of Lucy'ssuperior claims on Edward, and be taught to avoid himin future?
She had little difficulty in understanding thusmuch of her rival's intentions, and while she was firmlyresolved to act by her as every principle of honour andhonesty directed, to combat her own affection for Edwardand to see him as little as possible; she could not denyherself the comfort of endeavouring to convince Lucythat her heart was unwounded.
And as she could now havenothing more painful to hear on the subject than had alreadybeen told, she did not mistrust her own ability of goingthrough a repetition of particulars with composure.
But it was not immediately that an opportunityof doing so could be commanded, though Lucy was as welldisposed as herself to take advantage of any that occurred;for the weather was not often fine enough to allowof their joining in a walk, where they might most easilyseparate themselves from the others; and though theymet at least every other evening either at the parkor cottage, and chiefly at the former, they couldnot be supposed to meet for the sake of conversation.
Such a thought would never enter either Sir John or LadyMiddleton's head; and therefore very little leisurewas ever given for a general chat, and none at all forparticular discourse.
They met for the sake of eating,drinking, and laughing together, playing at cards,or consequences, or any other game that was sufficiently noisy.
One or two meetings of this kind had taken place,without affording Elinor any chance of engaging Lucyin private, when Sir John called at the cottage one morning,to beg, in the name of charity, that they would alldine with Lady Middleton that day, as he was obligedto attend the club at Exeter, and she would otherwise bequite alone, except her mother and the two Miss Steeles.
Elinor, who foresaw a fairer opening for the point shehad in view, in such a party as this was likely to be,more at liberty among themselves under the tranquiland well-bred direction of Lady Middleton than whenher husband united them together in one noisy purpose,immediately accepted the invitation; Margaret, with hermother's permission, was equally compliant, and Marianne,though always unwilling to join any of their parties,was persuaded by her mother, who could not bear to have herseclude herself from any chance of amusement, to go likewise.
The young ladies went, and Lady Middleton was happilypreserved from the frightful solitude which had threatened her.
The insipidity of the meeting was exactly such as Elinorhad expected; it produced not one novelty of thoughtor expression, and nothing could be less interestingthan the whole of their discourse both in the diningparlour and drawing room: to the latter, the childrenaccompanied them, and while they remained there, she wastoo well convinced of the impossibility of engaging Lucy'sattention to attempt it.
They quitted it only with theremoval of the tea-things.
The card-table was then placed,and Elinor began to wonder at herself for having everentertained a hope of finding time for conversationat the park.
They all rose up in preparation for a round game.
"I am glad," said Lady Middleton to Lucy,"you are not going to finish poor little Annamaria'sbasket this evening; for I am sure it must hurt youreyes to work filigree by candlelight.
And we will makethe dear little love some amends for her disappointmentto-morrow, and then I hope she will not much mind it."
This hint was enough, Lucy recollected herself instantlyand replied, "Indeed you are very much mistaken,Lady Middleton; I am only waiting to know whether you canmake your party without me, or I should have been at myfiligree already.
I would not disappoint the little angelfor all the world: and if you want me at the card-table now,I am resolved to finish the basket after supper."
"You are very good, I hope it won't hurt your eyes--will you ring the bell for some working candles?
My poor little girl would be sadly disappointed, I know,if the basket was not finished tomorrow, for though Itold her it certainly would not, I am sure she dependsupon having it done."
Lucy directly drew her work table near herand reseated herself with an alacrity and cheerfulnesswhich seemed to infer that she could taste no greaterdelight than in making a filigree basket for a spoilt child.
Lady Middleton proposed a rubber of Casino to the others.
No one made any objection but Marianne, who with her usualinattention to the forms of general civility, exclaimed,"Your Ladyship will have the goodness to excuse ME--youknow I detest cards.
I shall go to the piano-forte;I have not touched it since it was tuned."
And withoutfarther ceremony, she turned away and walked to the instrument.
Lady Middleton looked as if she thanked heaventhat SHE had never made so rude a speech.
"Marianne can never keep long from that instrumentyou know, ma'am," said Elinor, endeavouring to smoothaway the offence; "and I do not much wonder at it; for itis the very best toned piano-forte I ever heard."
The remaining five were now to draw their cards.
"Perhaps," continued Elinor, "if I should happento cut out, I may be of some use to Miss Lucy Steele,in rolling her papers for her; and there is so much stillto be done to the basket, that it must be impossibleI think for her labour singly, to finish it this evening.
I should like the work exceedingly, if she would allowme a share in it."
"Indeed I shall be very much obliged to youfor your help," cried Lucy, "for I find there is moreto be done to it than I thought there was; and it wouldbe a shocking thing to disappoint dear Annamaria after all."
"Oh!
that would be terrible, indeed," said Miss Steele--"Dear little soul, how I do love her!"
"You are very kind," said Lady Middleton to Elinor;"and as you really like the work, perhaps you will beas well pleased not to cut in till another rubber,or will you take your chance now?"
Elinor joyfully profited by the first of these proposals,and thus by a little of that address which Mariannecould never condescend to practise, gained her own end,and pleased Lady Middleton at the same time.
Lucy made roomfor her with ready attention, and the two fair rivals werethus seated side by side at the same table, and, with theutmost harmony, engaged in forwarding the same work.
The pianoforte at which Marianne, wrapped up in her ownmusic and her own thoughts, had by this time forgottenthat any body was in the room besides herself, was luckilyso near them that Miss Dashwood now judged she might safely,under the shelter of its noise, introduce the interestingsubject, without any risk of being heard at the card-table.
CHAPTER 24In a firm, though cautious tone, Elinor thus began.
"I should be undeserving of the confidence you havehonoured me with, if I felt no desire for its continuance,or no farther curiosity on its subject.
I willnot apologize therefore for bringing it forward again."
"Thank you," cried Lucy warmly, "for breakingthe ice; you have set my heart at ease by it; for I wassomehow or other afraid I had offended you by what Itold you that Monday."
"Offended me!
How could you suppose so?
Believe me,"and Elinor spoke it with the truest sincerity,"nothing could be farther from my intention than to giveyou such an idea.
Could you have a motive for the trust,that was not honourable and flattering to me?"
"And yet I do assure you," replied Lucy, her littlesharp eyes full of meaning, "there seemed to me to bea coldness and displeasure in your manner that made mequite uncomfortable.
I felt sure that you was angry with me;and have been quarrelling with myself ever since, for havingtook such a liberty as to trouble you with my affairs.
But I am very glad to find it was only my own fancy,and that you really do not blame me.
If you knew what aconsolation it was to me to relieve my heart speaking to youof what I am always thinking of every moment of my life,your compassion would make you overlook every thing elseI am sure."
"Indeed, I can easily believe that it was a very greatrelief to you, to acknowledge your situation to me, and beassured that you shall never have reason to repent it.
Your case is a very unfortunate one; you seem to me tobe surrounded with difficulties, and you will have needof all your mutual affection to support you under them.
Mr. Ferrars, I believe, is entirely dependent on his mother."
"He has only two thousand pounds of his own; it wouldbe madness to marry upon that, though for my own part,I could give up every prospect of more without a sigh.
I have been always used to a very small income, and couldstruggle with any poverty for him; but I love him too wellto be the selfish means of robbing him, perhaps, of all thathis mother might give him if he married to please her.
We must wait, it may be for many years.
With almost everyother man in the world, it would be an alarming prospect;but Edward's affection and constancy nothing can deprive me ofI know."
"That conviction must be every thing to you;and he is undoubtedly supported by the same trust in your's.
If the strength of your reciprocal attachment had failed,as between many people, and under many circumstancesit naturally would during a four years' engagement,your situation would have been pitiable, indeed."
Lucy here looked up; but Elinor was carefulin guarding her countenance from every expressionthat could give her words a suspicious tendency.
"Edward's love for me," said Lucy, "has been prettywell put to the test, by our long, very long absencesince we were first engaged, and it has stood the trialso well, that I should be unpardonable to doubt it now.
I can safely say that he has never gave me one moment'salarm on that account from the first."
Elinor hardly knew whether to smile or sighat this assertion.
Lucy went on.
"I am rather of a jealous temper tooby nature, and from our different situations in life,from his being so much more in the world than me, and ourcontinual separation, I was enough inclined for suspicion,to have found out the truth in an instant, if there had beenthe slightest alteration in his behaviour to me when we met,or any lowness of spirits that I could not account for,or if he had talked more of one lady than another,or seemed in any respect less happy at Longstaple than heused to be.
I do not mean to say that I am particularlyobservant or quick-sighted in general, but in such a caseI am sure I could not be deceived."
"All this," thought Elinor, "is very pretty;but it can impose upon neither of us."
"But what," said she after a short silence,"are your views?
or have you none but that of waiting forMrs. Ferrars's death, which is a melancholy and shockingextremity?--Is her son determined to submit to this,and to all the tediousness of the many years of suspensein which it may involve you, rather than run the riskof her displeasure for a while by owning the truth?"
"If we could be certain that it would be onlyfor a while!
But Mrs. Ferrars is a very headstrongproud woman, and in her first fit of anger upon hearingit, would very likely secure every thing to Robert,and the idea of that, for Edward's sake, frightens awayall my inclination for hasty measures."
"And for your own sake too, or you are carryingyour disinterestedness beyond reason."
Lucy looked at Elinor again, and was silent.
"Do you know Mr. Robert Ferrars?"
asked Elinor.
"Not at all--I never saw him; but I fancy heis very unlike his brother--silly and a great coxcomb."
"A great coxcomb!"
repeated Miss Steele, whose ear hadcaught those words by a sudden pause in Marianne's music.--"Oh, they are talking of their favourite beaux, I dare say."
"No sister," cried Lucy, "you are mistaken there, ourfavourite beaux are NOT great coxcombs."
"I can answer for it that Miss Dashwood's is not,"said Mrs. Jennings, laughing heartily; "for he is oneof the modestest, prettiest behaved young men I ever saw;but as for Lucy, she is such a sly little creature,there is no finding out who SHE likes."
"Oh," cried Miss Steele, looking significantly roundat them, "I dare say Lucy's beau is quite as modestand pretty behaved as Miss Dashwood's."
Elinor blushed in spite of herself.
Lucy bit her lip,and looked angrily at her sister.
A mutual silence tookplace for some time.
Lucy first put an end to it by sayingin a lower tone, though Marianne was then giving themthe powerful protection of a very magnificent concerto--"I will honestly tell you of one scheme which haslately come into my head, for bringing matters to bear;indeed I am bound to let you into the secret, for youare a party concerned.
I dare say you have seen enoughof Edward to know that he would prefer the church to everyother profession; now my plan is that he should takeorders as soon as he can, and then through your interest,which I am sure you would be kind enough to use out offriendship for him, and I hope out of some regard to me,your brother might be persuaded to give him Norland living;which I understand is a very good one, and the presentincumbent not likely to live a great while.
That wouldbe enough for us to marry upon, and we might trust to timeand chance for the rest."
"I should always be happy," replied Elinor, "to showany mark of my esteem and friendship for Mr. Ferrars;but do you not perceive that my interest on such anoccasion would be perfectly unnecessary?
He is brotherto Mrs. John Dashwood--THAT must be recommendation enoughto her husband."
"But Mrs. John Dashwood would not much approveof Edward's going into orders."
"Then I rather suspect that my interest woulddo very little."
They were again silent for many minutes.
At lengthLucy exclaimed with a deep sigh,"I believe it would be the wisest way to put an endto the business at once by dissolving the engagement.
We seem so beset with difficulties on every side,that though it would make us miserable for a time,we should be happier perhaps in the end.
But you willnot give me your advice, Miss Dashwood?"
"No," answered Elinor, with a smile, which concealedvery agitated feelings, "on such a subject I certainlywill not.
You know very well that my opinion would haveno weight with you, unless it were on the side of your wishes."
"Indeed you wrong me," replied Lucy, with greatsolemnity; "I know nobody of whose judgment I thinkso highly as I do of yours; and I do really believe,that if you was to say to me, 'I advise you by all meansto put an end to your engagement with Edward Ferrars,it will be more for the happiness of both of you,'I should resolve upon doing it immediately."
Elinor blushed for the insincerity of Edward'sfuture wife, and replied, "This compliment would effectuallyfrighten me from giving any opinion on the subjecthad I formed one.
It raises my influence much too high;the power of dividing two people so tenderly attachedis too much for an indifferent person."
"'Tis because you are an indifferent person," said Lucy,with some pique, and laying a particular stress on those words,"that your judgment might justly have such weight with me.
If you could be supposed to be biased in any respectby your own feelings, your opinion would not be worth having."
Elinor thought it wisest to make no answer to this,lest they might provoke each other to an unsuitable increaseof ease and unreserve; and was even partly determinednever to mention the subject again.
Another pausetherefore of many minutes' duration, succeeded this speech,and Lucy was still the first to end it.
"Shall you be in town this winter, Miss Dashwood?"
said she with all her accustomary complacency.
"Certainly not."
"I am sorry for that," returned the other,while her eyes brightened at the information,"it would have gave me such pleasure to meet you there!
But I dare say you will go for all that.
To be sure,your brother and sister will ask you to come to them."
"It will not be in my power to accept their invitationif they do."
"How unlucky that is!
I had quite depended uponmeeting you there.
Anne and me are to go the latter endof January to some relations who have been wanting us tovisit them these several years!
But I only go for the sakeof seeing Edward.
He will be there in February, otherwiseLondon would have no charms for me; I have not spirits for it."
Elinor was soon called to the card-table by theconclusion of the first rubber, and the confidentialdiscourse of the two ladies was therefore at an end,to which both of them submitted without any reluctance,for nothing had been said on either side to make themdislike each other less than they had done before;and Elinor sat down to the card table with the melancholypersuasion that Edward was not only without affectionfor the person who was to be his wife; but that he hadnot even the chance of being tolerably happy in marriage,which sincere affection on HER side would have given,for self-interest alone could induce a woman to keep a manto an engagement, of which she seemed so thoroughly awarethat he was weary.
From this time the subject was never revived by Elinor,and when entered on by Lucy, who seldom missed an opportunityof introducing it, and was particularly careful to informher confidante, of her happiness whenever she received a letterfrom Edward, it was treated by the former with calmnessand caution, and dismissed as soon as civility would allow;for she felt such conversations to be an indulgence whichLucy did not deserve, and which were dangerous to herself.
The visit of the Miss Steeles at Barton Park waslengthened far beyond what the first invitation implied.
Their favour increased; they could not be spared;Sir John would not hear of their going; and in spiteof their numerous and long arranged engagements in Exeter,in spite of the absolute necessity of returning to fulfillthem immediately, which was in full force at the endof every week, they were prevailed on to stay nearly twomonths at the park, and to assist in the due celebrationof that festival which requires a more than ordinaryshare of private balls and large dinners to proclaimits importance.
CHAPTER 25Though Mrs. Jennings was in the habit of spending a largeportion of the year at the houses of her children and friends,she was not without a settled habitation of her own.
Since the death of her husband, who had traded with successin a less elegant part of the town, she had resided everywinter in a house in one of the streets near Portman Square.
Towards this home, she began on the approach of Januaryto turn her thoughts, and thither she one day abruptly,and very unexpectedly by them, asked the elder MissesDashwood to accompany her.
Elinor, without observingthe varying complexion of her sister, and the animated lookwhich spoke no indifference to the plan, immediately gavea grateful but absolute denial for both, in which shebelieved herself to be speaking their united inclinations.
The reason alleged was their determined resolutionof not leaving their mother at that time of the year.
Mrs. Jennings received the refusal with some surprise,and repeated her invitation immediately.
"Oh, Lord!
I am sure your mother can spare youvery well, and I DO beg you will favour me withyour company, for I've quite set my heart upon it.
Don't fancy that you will be any inconvenience to me,for I shan't put myself at all out of my way for you.
It will only be sending Betty by the coach, and Ihope I can afford THAT.
We three shall be able to govery well in my chaise; and when we are in town,if you do not like to go wherever I do, well and good,you may always go with one of my daughters.
I am sureyour mother will not object to it; for I have had suchgood luck in getting my own children off my hands that shewill think me a very fit person to have the charge of you;and if I don't get one of you at least well marriedbefore I have done with you, it shall not be my fault.
I shall speak a good word for you to all the young men,you may depend upon it."
"I have a notion," said Sir John, "that Miss Mariannewould not object to such a scheme, if her elder sisterwould come into it.
It is very hard indeed that sheshould not have a little pleasure, because Miss Dashwooddoes not wish it.
So I would advise you two, to set offfor town, when you are tired of Barton, without sayinga word to Miss Dashwood about it."
"Nay," cried Mrs. Jennings, "I am sure I shall bemonstrous glad of Miss Marianne's company, whether MissDashwood will go or not, only the more the merrier say I,and I thought it would be more comfortable for them tobe together; because, if they got tired of me, they might talkto one another, and laugh at my old ways behind my back.
But one or the other, if not both of them, I must have.
Lord bless me!
how do you think I can live poking by myself,I who have been always used till this winter to haveCharlotte with me.
Come, Miss Marianne, let us strikehands upon the bargain, and if Miss Dashwood will changeher mind by and bye, why so much the better."
"I thank you, ma'am, sincerely thank you," said Marianne,with warmth: "your invitation has insured my gratitude for ever,and it would give me such happiness, yes, almost the greatesthappiness I am capable of, to be able to accept it.
But my mother, my dearest, kindest mother,--I feel thejustice of what Elinor has urged, and if she were to bemade less happy, less comfortable by our absence--Oh!
no,nothing should tempt me to leave her.
It should not,must not be a struggle."
Mrs. Jennings repeated her assurance that Mrs. Dashwoodcould spare them perfectly well; and Elinor, who nowunderstood her sister, and saw to what indifference toalmost every thing else she was carried by her eagernessto be with Willoughby again, made no farther directopposition to the plan, and merely referred it to hermother's decision, from whom however she scarcely expectedto receive any support in her endeavour to prevent a visit,which she could not approve of for Marianne, and whichon her own account she had particular reasons to avoid.
Whatever Marianne was desirous of, her mother would be eagerto promote--she could not expect to influence the latterto cautiousness of conduct in an affair respecting which shehad never been able to inspire her with distrust; and shedared not explain the motive of her own disinclinationfor going to London.
That Marianne, fastidious as she was,thoroughly acquainted with Mrs. Jennings' manners,and invariably disgusted by them, should overlook everyinconvenience of that kind, should disregard whatevermust be most wounding to her irritable feelings, in herpursuit of one object, was such a proof, so strong,so full, of the importance of that object to her, as Elinor,in spite of all that had passed, was not prepared to witness.
On being informed of the invitation, Mrs. Dashwood,persuaded that such an excursion would be productiveof much amusement to both her daughters, and perceivingthrough all her affectionate attention to herself,how much the heart of Marianne was in it, would not hearof their declining the offer upon HER account; insisted ontheir both accepting it directly; and then began to foresee,with her usual cheerfulness, a variety of advantages thatwould accrue to them all, from this separation.
"I am delighted with the plan," she cried,"it is exactly what I could wish.
Margaret and I shallbe as much benefited by it as yourselves.
When youand the Middletons are gone, we shall go on so quietlyand happily together with our books and our music!
Youwill find Margaret so improved when you come back again!
I have a little plan of alteration for your bedrooms too,which may now be performed without any inconvenienceto any one.
It is very right that you SHOULD go to town;I would have every young woman of your condition in lifeacquainted with the manners and amusements of London.
You will be under the care of a motherly good sortof woman, of whose kindness to you I can have no doubt.
And in all probability you will see your brother,and whatever may be his faults, or the faults of his wife,when I consider whose son he is, I cannot bear to have you sowholly estranged from each other."
"Though with your usual anxiety for our happiness,"said Elinor, "you have been obviating every impedimentto the present scheme which occurred to you, there isstill one objection which, in my opinion, cannot be soeasily removed."
Marianne's countenance sunk.
"And what," said Mrs. Dashwood, "is my dear prudentElinor going to suggest?
What formidable obstacle is shenow to bring forward?
Do let me hear a word about theexpense of it."
"My objection is this; though I think very well ofMrs. Jennings's heart, she is not a woman whose societycan afford us pleasure, or whose protection will giveus consequence."
"That is very true," replied her mother, "but ofher society, separately from that of other people,you will scarcely have any thing at all, and you willalmost always appear in public with Lady Middleton."
"If Elinor is frightened away by her dislike ofMrs. Jennings," said Marianne, "at least it need not preventMY accepting her invitation.
I have no such scruples,and I am sure I could put up with every unpleasantnessof that kind with very little effort."
Elinor could not help smiling at this display ofindifference towards the manners of a person, to whom shehad often had difficulty in persuading Marianne to behavewith tolerable politeness; and resolved within herself,that if her sister persisted in going, she wouldgo likewise, as she did not think it proper that Marianneshould be left to the sole guidance of her own judgment,or that Mrs. Jennings should be abandoned to the mercyof Marianne for all the comfort of her domestic hours.
To this determination she was the more easily reconciled,by recollecting that Edward Ferrars, by Lucy's account,was not to be in town before February; and thattheir visit, without any unreasonable abridgement,might be previously finished.
"I will have you BOTH go," said Mrs. Dashwood;"these objections are nonsensical.
You will have muchpleasure in being in London, and especially in being together;and if Elinor would ever condescend to anticipate enjoyment,she would foresee it there from a variety of sources;she would, perhaps, expect some from improving heracquaintance with her sister-in-law's family."
Elinor had often wished for an opportunity ofattempting to weaken her mother's dependence on theattachment of Edward and herself, that the shock mightbe less when the whole truth were revealed, and nowon this attack, though almost hopeless of success,she forced herself to begin her design by saying,as calmly as she could, "I like Edward Ferrars very much,and shall always be glad to see him; but as to the restof the family, it is a matter of perfect indifferenceto me, whether I am ever known to them or not."
Mrs. Dashwood smiled, and said nothing.
Marianne lifted up her eyes in astonishment, and Elinorconjectured that she might as well have held her tongue.
After very little farther discourse, it was finallysettled that the invitation should be fully accepted.
Mrs. Jennings received the information with a greatdeal of joy, and many assurances of kindness and care;nor was it a matter of pleasure merely to her.
Sir Johnwas delighted; for to a man, whose prevailing anxietywas the dread of being alone, the acquisition of two,to the number of inhabitants in London, was something.
Even Lady Middleton took the trouble of being delighted,which was putting herself rather out of her way;and as for the Miss Steeles, especially Lucy, they hadnever been so happy in their lives as this intelligencemade them.
Elinor submitted to the arrangement which counteractedher wishes with less reluctance than she had expectedto feel.
With regard to herself, it was now a matterof unconcern whether she went to town or not, and whenshe saw her mother so thoroughly pleased with the plan,and her sister exhilarated by it in look, voice, and manner,restored to all her usual animation, and elevated to morethan her usual gaiety, she could not be dissatisfiedwith the cause, and would hardly allow herself to distrustthe consequence.
Marianne's joy was almost a degree beyond happiness,so great was the perturbation of her spirits and herimpatience to be gone.
Her unwillingness to quit hermother was her only restorative to calmness; and at themoment of parting her grief on that score was excessive.
Her mother's affliction was hardly less, and Elinorwas the only one of the three, who seemed to considerthe separation as any thing short of eternal.
Their departure took place in the first week in January.
The Middletons were to follow in about a week.
The MissSteeles kept their station at the park, and were to quitit only with the rest of the family.
CHAPTER 26Elinor could not find herself in the carriage with Mrs. Jennings,and beginning a journey to London under her protection,and as her guest, without wondering at her own situation,so short had their acquaintance with that lady been,so wholly unsuited were they in age and disposition,and so many had been her objections against such a measureonly a few days before!
But these objections had all,with that happy ardour of youth which Marianne and her motherequally shared, been overcome or overlooked; and Elinor,in spite of every occasional doubt of Willoughby's constancy,could not witness the rapture of delightful expectationwhich filled the whole soul and beamed in the eyesof Marianne, without feeling how blank was her own prospect,how cheerless her own state of mind in the comparison,and how gladly she would engage in the solicitude ofMarianne's situation to have the same animating objectin view, the same possibility of hope.
A short, a veryshort time however must now decide what Willoughby'sintentions were; in all probability he was already in town.
Marianne's eagerness to be gone declared her dependenceon finding him there; and Elinor was resolved not only upongaining every new light as to his character which herown observation or the intelligence of others could give her,but likewise upon watching his behaviour to her sisterwith such zealous attention, as to ascertain what he wasand what he meant, before many meetings had taken place.
Should the result of her observations be unfavourable,she was determined at all events to open the eyesof her sister; should it be otherwise, her exertionswould be of a different nature--she must then learnto avoid every selfish comparison, and banish every regretwhich might lessen her satisfaction in the happiness of Marianne.
They were three days on their journey, and Marianne'sbehaviour as they travelled was a happy specimen of whatfuture complaisance and companionableness to Mrs. Jenningsmight be expected to be.
She sat in silence almost allthe way, wrapt in her own meditations, and scarcely evervoluntarily speaking, except when any object of picturesquebeauty within their view drew from her an exclamationof delight exclusively addressed to her sister.
To atonefor this conduct therefore, Elinor took immediate possessionof the post of civility which she had assigned herself,behaved with the greatest attention to Mrs. Jennings,talked with her, laughed with her, and listened to herwhenever she could; and Mrs. Jennings on her sidetreated them both with all possible kindness, was solicitouson every occasion for their ease and enjoyment, and onlydisturbed that she could not make them choose their owndinners at the inn, nor extort a confession of theirpreferring salmon to cod, or boiled fowls to veal cutlets.
They reached town by three o'clock the third day, glad tobe released, after such a journey, from the confinementof a carriage, and ready to enjoy all the luxury of a good fire.
The house was handsome, and handsomely fitted up,and the young ladies were immediately put in possessionof a very comfortable apartment.
It had formerlybeen Charlotte's, and over the mantelpiece still hunga landscape in coloured silks of her performance,in proof of her having spent seven years at a great schoolin town to some effect.
As dinner was not to be ready in less than twohours from their arrival, Elinor determined to employthe interval in writing to her mother, and sat down forthat purpose.
In a few moments Marianne did the same.
"I am writing home, Marianne," said Elinor; "had not youbetter defer your letter for a day or two?"
"I am NOT going to write to my mother,"replied Marianne, hastily, and as if wishing to avoidany farther inquiry.
Elinor said no more; it immediatelystruck her that she must then be writing to Willoughby;and the conclusion which as instantly followed was,that, however mysteriously they might wish to conductthe affair, they must be engaged.
This conviction,though not entirely satisfactory, gave her pleasure,and she continued her letter with greater alacrity.
Marianne's was finished in a very few minutes;in length it could be no more than a note; it was thenfolded up, sealed, and directed with eager rapidity.
Elinor thought she could distinguish a large W inthe direction; and no sooner was it complete than Marianne,ringing the bell, requested the footman who answered itto get that letter conveyed for her to the two-penny post.
This decided the matter at once.
Her spirits still continued very high; but therewas a flutter in them which prevented their giving muchpleasure to her sister, and this agitation increased asthe evening drew on.
She could scarcely eat any dinner,and when they afterwards returned to the drawing room,seemed anxiously listening to the sound of every carriage.
It was a great satisfaction to Elinor that Mrs. Jennings,by being much engaged in her own room, could see littleof what was passing.
The tea things were brought in,and already had Marianne been disappointed more than onceby a rap at a neighbouring door, when a loud one was suddenlyheard which could not be mistaken for one at any other house,Elinor felt secure of its announcing Willoughby's approach,and Marianne, starting up, moved towards the door.
Every thing was silent; this could not be borne many seconds;she opened the door, advanced a few steps towards the stairs,and after listening half a minute, returned into the roomin all the agitation which a conviction of having heardhim would naturally produce; in the ecstasy of herfeelings at that instant she could not help exclaiming,"Oh, Elinor, it is Willoughby, indeed it is!"
and seemedalmost ready to throw herself into his arms, when ColonelBrandon appeared.
It was too great a shock to be borne with calmness,and she immediately left the room.
Elinor was disappointed too;but at the same time her regard for Colonel Brandon ensuredhis welcome with her; and she felt particularly hurt thata man so partial to her sister should perceive that sheexperienced nothing but grief and disappointment in seeing him.
She instantly saw that it was not unnoticed by him,that he even observed Marianne as she quitted the room,with such astonishment and concern, as hardly left himthe recollection of what civility demanded towards herself.
"Is your sister ill?"
said he.
Elinor answered in some distress that she was,and then talked of head-aches, low spirits, and over fatigues;and of every thing to which she could decently attributeher sister's behaviour.
He heard her with the most earnest attention,but seeming to recollect himself, said no more on the subject,and began directly to speak of his pleasure at seeing themin London, making the usual inquiries about their journey,and the friends they had left behind.
In this calm kind of way, with very little intereston either side, they continued to talk, both of them outof spirits, and the thoughts of both engaged elsewhere.
Elinor wished very much to ask whether Willoughby werethen in town, but she was afraid of giving him painby any enquiry after his rival; and at length, by wayof saying something, she asked if he had been in Londonever since she had seen him last.
"Yes," he replied,with some embarrassment, "almost ever since; I have beenonce or twice at Delaford for a few days, but it has neverbeen in my power to return to Barton."
This, and the manner in which it was said,immediately brought back to her remembrance all thecircumstances of his quitting that place, with theuneasiness and suspicions they had caused to Mrs. Jennings,and she was fearful that her question had impliedmuch more curiosity on the subject than she had ever felt.
Mrs. Jennings soon came in.
"Oh!
Colonel," said she,with her usual noisy cheerfulness, "I am monstrous gladto see you--sorry I could not come before--beg yourpardon, but I have been forced to look about me a little,and settle my matters; for it is a long while since Ihave been at home, and you know one has always a worldof little odd things to do after one has been away forany time; and then I have had Cartwright to settle with--Lord, I have been as busy as a bee ever since dinner!
But pray, Colonel, how came you to conjure out that I shouldbe in town today?"
"I had the pleasure of hearing it at Mr. Palmer's,where I have been dining."
"Oh, you did; well, and how do they all do at theirhouse?
How does Charlotte do?
I warrant you she is a finesize by this time."
"Mrs. Palmer appeared quite well, and I am commissionedto tell you, that you will certainly see her to-morrow."
"Ay, to be sure, I thought as much.
Well, Colonel,I have brought two young ladies with me, you see--that is,you see but one of them now, but there is another somewhere.
Your friend, Miss Marianne, too--which you will not besorry to hear.
I do not know what you and Mr. Willoughbywill do between you about her.
Ay, it is a fine thingto be young and handsome.
Well!
I was young once, but Inever was very handsome--worse luck for me.
However, I gota very good husband, and I don't know what the greatestbeauty can do more.
Ah!
poor man!
he has been deadthese eight years and better.
But Colonel, where haveyou been to since we parted?
And how does your businessgo on?
Come, come, let's have no secrets among friends."
He replied with his accustomary mildness to allher inquiries, but without satisfying her in any.
Elinor now began to make the tea, and Marianne wasobliged to appear again.
After her entrance, Colonel Brandon becamemore thoughtful and silent than he had been before,and Mrs. Jennings could not prevail on him to stay long.
No other visitor appeared that evening, and the ladieswere unanimous in agreeing to go early to bed.
Marianne rose the next morning with recovered spiritsand happy looks.
The disappointment of the evening beforeseemed forgotten in the expectation of what was to happenthat day.
They had not long finished their breakfast beforeMrs. Palmer's barouche stopped at the door, and in a fewminutes she came laughing into the room: so delightedto see them all, that it was hard to say whether shereceived most pleasure from meeting her mother or the MissDashwoods again.
So surprised at their coming to town,though it was what she had rather expected all along;so angry at their accepting her mother's invitationafter having declined her own, though at the same timeshe would never have forgiven them if they had not come!
"Mr. Palmer will be so happy to see you,"said she; "What do you think he said when he heardof your coming with Mamma?
I forget what it was now,but it was something so droll!"
After an hour or two spent in what her mother calledcomfortable chat, or in other words, in every variety of inquiryconcerning all their acquaintance on Mrs. Jennings's side,and in laughter without cause on Mrs. Palmer's, it wasproposed by the latter that they should all accompanyher to some shops where she had business that morning,to which Mrs. Jennings and Elinor readily consented,as having likewise some purchases to make themselves;and Marianne, though declining it at first was inducedto go likewise.
Wherever they went, she was evidently always onthe watch.
In Bond Street especially, where much oftheir business lay, her eyes were in constant inquiry;and in whatever shop the party were engaged, her mind wasequally abstracted from every thing actually before them,from all that interested and occupied the others.
Restless and dissatisfied every where, her sister couldnever obtain her opinion of any article of purchase,however it might equally concern them both: she receivedno pleasure from anything; was only impatient to be athome again, and could with difficulty govern her vexationat the tediousness of Mrs. Palmer, whose eye was caughtby every thing pretty, expensive, or new; who was wildto buy all, could determine on none, and dawdled away hertime in rapture and indecision.
It was late in the morning before they returned home;and no sooner had they entered the house than Marianne fleweagerly up stairs, and when Elinor followed, she foundher turning from the table with a sorrowful countenance,which declared that no Willoughby had been there.
"Has no letter been left here for me since we went out?"
said she to the footman who then entered with the parcels.
She was answered in the negative.
"Are you quite sureof it?"
she replied.
"Are you certain that no servant,no porter has left any letter or note?"
The man replied that none had.
"How very odd!"
said she, in a low and disappointedvoice, as she turned away to the window.
"How odd, indeed!"
repeated Elinor within herself,regarding her sister with uneasiness.
"If she had notknown him to be in town she would not have written to him,as she did; she would have written to Combe Magna;and if he is in town, how odd that he should neithercome nor write!
Oh!
my dear mother, you must be wrongin permitting an engagement between a daughter so young,a man so little known, to be carried on in so doubtful,so mysterious a manner!
I long to inquire; and how will MYinterference be borne."
She determined, after some consideration, that ifappearances continued many days longer as unpleasant as theynow were, she would represent in the strongest mannerto her mother the necessity of some serious enquiry into theaffair.
Mrs. Palmer and two elderly ladies of Mrs. Jennings'sintimate acquaintance, whom she had met and invitedin the morning, dined with them.
The former left themsoon after tea to fulfill her evening engagements;and Elinor was obliged to assist in making a whist tablefor the others.
Marianne was of no use on these occasions,as she would never learn the game; but though her timewas therefore at her own disposal, the evening was by nomeans more productive of pleasure to her than to Elinor,for it was spent in all the anxiety of expectation and thepain of disappointment.
She sometimes endeavoured for afew minutes to read; but the book was soon thrown aside,and she returned to the more interesting employmentof walking backwards and forwards across the room,pausing for a moment whenever she came to the window,in hopes of distinguishing the long-expected rap.
CHAPTER 27"If this open weather holds much longer," said Mrs. Jennings,when they met at breakfast the following morning,"Sir John will not like leaving Barton next week;'tis a sad thing for sportsmen to lose a day's pleasure.
Poor souls!
I always pity them when they do; they seemto take it so much to heart."
"That is true," cried Marianne, in a cheerful voice,and walking to the window as she spoke, to examine the day.
"I had not thought of that.
This weather will keep manysportsmen in the country."
It was a lucky recollection, all her good spirits wererestored by it.
"It is charming weather for THEM indeed,"she continued, as she sat down to the breakfast tablewith a happy countenance.
"How much they must enjoyit!
But" (with a little return of anxiety) "it cannotbe expected to last long.
At this time of the year,and after such a series of rain, we shall certainlyhave very little more of it.
Frosts will soon set in,and in all probability with severity.
In another dayor two perhaps; this extreme mildness can hardly lastlonger--nay, perhaps it may freeze tonight!"
"At any rate," said Elinor, wishing to preventMrs. Jennings from seeing her sister's thoughts as clearlyas she did, "I dare say we shall have Sir John and LadyMiddleton in town by the end of next week."
"Ay, my dear, I'll warrant you we do.
Mary alwayshas her own way."
"And now," silently conjectured Elinor, "she willwrite to Combe by this day's post."
But if she DID, the letter was written and sent awaywith a privacy which eluded all her watchfulness to ascertainthe fact.
Whatever the truth of it might be, and faras Elinor was from feeling thorough contentment about it,yet while she saw Marianne in spirits, she could not bevery uncomfortable herself.
And Marianne was in spirits;happy in the mildness of the weather, and still happierin her expectation of a frost.
The morning was chiefly spent in leaving cards atthe houses of Mrs. Jennings's acquaintance to informthem of her being in town; and Marianne was all the timebusy in observing the direction of the wind, watching thevariations of the sky and imagining an alteration in the air.
"Don't you find it colder than it was in the morning,Elinor?
There seems to me a very decided difference.
I can hardly keep my hands warm even in my muff.
It wasnot so yesterday, I think.
The clouds seem parting too,the sun will be out in a moment, and we shall have aclear afternoon."
Elinor was alternately diverted and pained;but Marianne persevered, and saw every night in thebrightness of the fire, and every morning in the appearanceof the atmosphere, the certain symptoms of approaching frost.
The Miss Dashwoods had no greater reason to bedissatisfied with Mrs. Jennings's style of living, and setof acquaintance, than with her behaviour to themselves,which was invariably kind.
Every thing in her householdarrangements was conducted on the most liberal plan,and excepting a few old city friends, whom, to LadyMiddleton's regret, she had never dropped, she visitedno one to whom an introduction could at all discomposethe feelings of her young companions.
Pleased to findherself more comfortably situated in that particular thanshe had expected, Elinor was very willing to compoundfor the want of much real enjoyment from any of theirevening parties, which, whether at home or abroad,formed only for cards, could have little to amuse her.
Colonel Brandon, who had a general invitationto the house, was with them almost every day; he cameto look at Marianne and talk to Elinor, who often derivedmore satisfaction from conversing with him than from anyother daily occurrence, but who saw at the same timewith much concern his continued regard for her sister.
She feared it was a strengthening regard.
It grieved herto see the earnestness with which he often watched Marianne,and his spirits were certainly worse than when at Barton.
About a week after their arrival, it becamecertain that Willoughby was also arrived.
His cardwas on the table when they came in from the morning's drive.
"Good God!"
cried Marianne, "he has been here whilewe were out."
Elinor, rejoiced to be assured of hisbeing in London, now ventured to say, "Depend upon it,he will call again tomorrow."
But Marianne seemedhardly to hear her, and on Mrs. Jenning's entrance,escaped with the precious card.
This event, while it raised the spirits of Elinor,restored to those of her sister all, and more than all,their former agitation.
From this moment her mind wasnever quiet; the expectation of seeing him every hourof the day, made her unfit for any thing.
She insistedon being left behind, the next morning, when the otherswent out.
Elinor's thoughts were full of what might be passingin Berkeley Street during their absence; but a moment'sglance at her sister when they returned was enough toinform her, that Willoughby had paid no second visit there.
A note was just then brought in, and laid on the table,"For me!"
cried Marianne, stepping hastily forward.
"No, ma'am, for my mistress."
But Marianne, not convinced, took it instantly up.
"It is indeed for Mrs. Jennings; how provoking!"
"You are expecting a letter, then?"
said Elinor,unable to be longer silent.
"Yes, a little--not much."
After a short pause.
"You have no confidencein me, Marianne."
"Nay, Elinor, this reproach from YOU--you who haveconfidence in no one!"
"Me!"
returned Elinor in some confusion; "indeed,Marianne, I have nothing to tell."
"Nor I," answered Marianne with energy, "our situationsthen are alike.
We have neither of us any thing to tell;you, because you do not communicate, and I, becauseI conceal nothing."
Elinor, distressed by this charge of reserve in herself,which she was not at liberty to do away, knew not how,under such circumstances, to press for greater opennessin Marianne.
Mrs. Jennings soon appeared, and the note beinggiven her, she read it aloud.
It was from Lady Middleton,announcing their arrival in Conduit Street the night before,and requesting the company of her mother and cousinsthe following evening.
Business on Sir John's part,and a violent cold on her own, prevented their callingin Berkeley Street.
The invitation was accepted;but when the hour of appointment drew near, necessary asit was in common civility to Mrs. Jennings, that theyshould both attend her on such a visit, Elinor had somedifficulty in persuading her sister to go, for stillshe had seen nothing of Willoughby; and therefore wasnot more indisposed for amusement abroad, than unwillingto run the risk of his calling again in her absence.
Elinor found, when the evening was over,that disposition is not materially altered by a changeof abode, for although scarcely settled in town,Sir John had contrived to collect around him, nearly twentyyoung people, and to amuse them with a ball.
This wasan affair, however, of which Lady Middleton did not approve.
In the country, an unpremeditated dance was very allowable;but in London, where the reputation of elegance was moreimportant and less easily attained, it was risking too muchfor the gratification of a few girls, to have it known thatLady Middleton had given a small dance of eight or nine couple,with two violins, and a mere side-board collation.
Mr. and Mrs. Palmer were of the party; from the former,whom they had not seen before since their arrival in town,as he was careful to avoid the appearance of any attentionto his mother-in-law, and therefore never came near her,they received no mark of recognition on their entrance.
He looked at them slightly, without seeming to knowwho they were, and merely nodded to Mrs. Jennings fromthe other side of the room.
Marianne gave one glanceround the apartment as she entered: it was enough--HEwas not there--and she sat down, equally ill-disposedto receive or communicate pleasure.
After they had beenassembled about an hour, Mr. Palmer sauntered towardsthe Miss Dashwoods to express his surprise on seeing themin town, though Colonel Brandon had been first informedof their arrival at his house, and he had himself saidsomething very droll on hearing that they were to come.
"I thought you were both in Devonshire," said he.
"Did you?"
replied Elinor.
"When do you go back again?"
"I do not know."
And thus ended their discourse.
Never had Marianne been so unwilling to dancein her life, as she was that evening, and never so muchfatigued by the exercise.
She complained of itas they returned to Berkeley Street.
"Aye, aye," said Mrs. Jennings, "we know the reasonof all that very well; if a certain person who shallbe nameless, had been there, you would not have been abit tired: and to say the truth it was not very prettyof him not to give you the meeting when he was invited."
"Invited!"
cried Marianne.
"So my daughter Middleton told me, for it seems SirJohn met him somewhere in the street this morning."
Marianne said no more, but looked exceedingly hurt.
Impatient in this situation to be doing somethingthat might lead to her sister's relief, Elinor resolvedto write the next morning to her mother, and hopedby awakening her fears for the health of Marianne,to procure those inquiries which had been so long delayed;and she was still more eagerly bent on this measureby perceiving after breakfast on the morrow, that Mariannewas again writing to Willoughby, for she could not supposeit to be to any other person.
About the middle of the day, Mrs. Jennings went out byherself on business, and Elinor began her letter directly,while Marianne, too restless for employment, too anxiousfor conversation, walked from one window to the other,or sat down by the fire in melancholy meditation.
Elinor was very earnest in her application to her mother,relating all that had passed, her suspicions ofWilloughby's inconstancy, urging her by every pleaof duty and affection to demand from Marianne an accountof her real situation with respect to him.
Her letter was scarcely finished, when a rapforetold a visitor, and Colonel Brandon was announced.
Marianne, who had seen him from the window, and who hatedcompany of any kind, left the room before he entered it.
He looked more than usually grave, and though expressingsatisfaction at finding Miss Dashwood alone, as if hehad somewhat in particular to tell her, sat for sometime without saying a word.
Elinor, persuaded that hehad some communication to make in which her sisterwas concerned, impatiently expected its opening.
It was not the first time of her feeling the same kindof conviction; for, more than once before, beginning withthe observation of "your sister looks unwell to-day,"or "your sister seems out of spirits," he had appearedon the point, either of disclosing, or of inquiring,something particular about her.
After a pause of severalminutes, their silence was broken, by his asking herin a voice of some agitation, when he was to congratulateher on the acquisition of a brother?
Elinor was notprepared for such a question, and having no answer ready,was obliged to adopt the simple and common expedient,of asking what he meant?
He tried to smile as he replied,"your sister's engagement to Mr. Willoughby is very generallyknown."
"It cannot be generally known," returned Elinor,"for her own family do not know it."
He looked surprised and said, "I beg your pardon,I am afraid my inquiry has been impertinent; but I had notsupposed any secrecy intended, as they openly correspond,and their marriage is universally talked of."
"How can that be?
By whom can you have heardit mentioned?"
"By many--by some of whom you know nothing, by otherswith whom you are most intimate, Mrs. Jennings, Mrs. Palmer,and the Middletons.
But still I might not have believed it,for where the mind is perhaps rather unwilling tobe convinced, it will always find something to supportits doubts, if I had not, when the servant let me in today,accidentally seen a letter in his hand, directed toMr. Willoughby in your sister's writing.
I came to inquire,but I was convinced before I could ask the question.
Is every thing finally settled?
Is it impossible to-?
But I have no right, and I could have no chance of succeeding.
Excuse me, Miss Dashwood.
I believe I have been wrongin saying so much, but I hardly know what to do, and onyour prudence I have the strongest dependence.
Tell methat it is all absolutely resolved on, that any attempt,that in short concealment, if concealment be possible,is all that remains."
These words, which conveyed to Elinor a direct avowalof his love for her sister, affected her very much.
She was not immediately able to say anything, and evenwhen her spirits were recovered, she debated for a shorttime, on the answer it would be most proper to give.
The real state of things between Willoughby and her sisterwas so little known to herself, that in endeavouringto explain it, she might be as liable to say too muchas too little.
Yet as she was convinced that Marianne'saffection for Willoughby, could leave no hope of ColonelBrandon's success, whatever the event of that affectionmight be, and at the same time wished to shield her conductfrom censure, she thought it most prudent and kind,after some consideration, to say more than she really knewor believed.
She acknowledged, therefore, that thoughshe had never been informed by themselves of the termson which they stood with each other, of their mutualaffection she had no doubt, and of their correspondenceshe was not astonished to hear.
He listened to her with silent attention, and onher ceasing to speak, rose directly from his seat,and after saying in a voice of emotion, "to your sisterI wish all imaginable happiness; to Willoughby that hemay endeavour to deserve her,"--took leave, and went away.
Elinor derived no comfortable feelings from thisconversation, to lessen the uneasiness of her mind onother points; she was left, on the contrary, with amelancholy impression of Colonel Brandon's unhappiness,and was prevented even from wishing it removed,by her anxiety for the very event that must confirm it.
CHAPTER 28Nothing occurred during the next three or four days,to make Elinor regret what she had done, in applyingto her mother; for Willoughby neither came nor wrote.
They were engaged about the end of that time to attendLady Middleton to a party, from which Mrs. Jennings waskept away by the indisposition of her youngest daughter;and for this party, Marianne, wholly dispirited,careless of her appearance, and seeming equally indifferentwhether she went or staid, prepared, without one lookof hope or one expression of pleasure.
She sat by thedrawing-room fire after tea, till the moment of LadyMiddleton's arrival, without once stirring from her seat,or altering her attitude, lost in her own thoughts,and insensible of her sister's presence; and when atlast they were told that Lady Middleton waited for themat the door, she started as if she had forgotten thatany one was expected.
They arrived in due time at the place of destination,and as soon as the string of carriages before themwould allow, alighted, ascended the stairs, heard theirnames announced from one landing-place to another in anaudible voice, and entered a room splendidly lit up,quite full of company, and insufferably hot.
When they hadpaid their tribute of politeness by curtsying to the ladyof the house, they were permitted to mingle in the crowd,and take their share of the heat and inconvenience, towhich their arrival must necessarily add.
After some timespent in saying little or doing less, Lady Middleton satdown to Cassino, and as Marianne was not in spirits formoving about, she and Elinor luckily succeeding to chairs,placed themselves at no great distance from the table.
They had not remained in this manner long, before Elinorperceived Willoughby, standing within a few yardsof them, in earnest conversation with a very fashionablelooking young woman.
She soon caught his eye, and heimmediately bowed, but without attempting to speak to her,or to approach Marianne, though he could not but see her;and then continued his discourse with the same lady.
Elinor turned involuntarily to Marianne, to see whetherit could be unobserved by her.
At that moment she firstperceived him, and her whole countenance glowing withsudden delight, she would have moved towards him instantly,had not her sister caught hold of her.
"Good heavens!"
she exclaimed, "he is there--heis there--Oh!
why does he not look at me?
why cannotI speak to him?"
"Pray, pray be composed," cried Elinor, "and donot betray what you feel to every body present.
Perhaps he has not observed you yet."
This however was more than she could believe herself;and to be composed at such a moment was not only beyondthe reach of Marianne, it was beyond her wish.
She satin an agony of impatience which affected every feature.
At last he turned round again, and regarded them both;she started up, and pronouncing his name in a toneof affection, held out her hand to him.
He approached,and addressing himself rather to Elinor than Marianne,as if wishing to avoid her eye, and determined not toobserve her attitude, inquired in a hurried manner afterMrs. Dashwood, and asked how long they had been in town.
Elinor was robbed of all presence of mind by such an address,and was unable to say a word.
But the feelings of her sisterwere instantly expressed.
Her face was crimsoned over,and she exclaimed, in a voice of the greatest emotion,"Good God!
Willoughby, what is the meaning of this?
Have you not received my letters?
Will you not shakehands with me?"
He could not then avoid it, but her touch seemedpainful to him, and he held her hand only for a moment.
During all this time he was evidently struggling for composure.
Elinor watched his countenance and saw its expressionbecoming more tranquil.
After a moment's pause, he spokewith calmness.
"I did myself the honour of calling in BerkeleyStreet last Tuesday, and very much regretted that I wasnot fortunate enough to find yourselves and Mrs. Jenningsat home.
My card was not lost, I hope."
"But have you not received my notes?"
cried Mariannein the wildest anxiety.
"Here is some mistake I amsure--some dreadful mistake.
What can be the meaningof it?
Tell me, Willoughby; for heaven's sake tell me,what is the matter?"
He made no reply; his complexion changed and all hisembarrassment returned; but as if, on catching the eyeof the young lady with whom he had been previously talking,he felt the necessity of instant exertion, he recoveredhimself again, and after saying, "Yes, I had the pleasureof receiving the information of your arrival in town,which you were so good as to send me," turned hastily awaywith a slight bow and joined his friend.
Marianne, now looking dreadfully white, and unableto stand, sunk into her chair, and Elinor, expecting everymoment to see her faint, tried to screen her from theobservation of others, while reviving her with lavender water.
"Go to him, Elinor," she cried, as soon as shecould speak, "and force him to come to me.
Tell himI must see him again--must speak to him instantly.--I cannot rest--I shall not have a moment's peace till thisis explained--some dreadful misapprehension or other.--Oh go to him this moment."
"How can that be done?
No, my dearest Marianne,you must wait.
This is not the place for explanations.
Wait only till tomorrow."
With difficulty however could she prevent herfrom following him herself; and to persuade her to checkher agitation, to wait, at least, with the appearanceof composure, till she might speak to him with more privacyand more effect, was impossible; for Marianne continuedincessantly to give way in a low voice to the miseryof her feelings, by exclamations of wretchedness.
In a short time Elinor saw Willoughby quit the room by thedoor towards the staircase, and telling Marianne that hewas gone, urged the impossibility of speaking to him againthat evening, as a fresh argument for her to be calm.
She instantly begged her sister would entreat LadyMiddleton to take them home, as she was too miserableto stay a minute longer.
Lady Middleton, though in the middle of a rubber,on being informed that Marianne was unwell, was toopolite to object for a moment to her wish of going away,and making over her cards to a friend, they departedas soon the carriage could be found.
Scarcely a wordwas spoken during their return to Berkeley Street.
Marianne was in a silent agony, too much oppressed evenfor tears; but as Mrs. Jennings was luckily not come home,they could go directly to their own room, where hartshornrestored her a little to herself.
She was soon undressedand in bed, and as she seemed desirous of being alone,her sister then left her, and while she waited the returnof Mrs. Jennings, had leisure enough for thinking overthe past.
That some kind of engagement had subsistedbetween Willoughby and Marianne she could not doubt,and that Willoughby was weary of it, seemed equally clear;for however Marianne might still feed her own wishes,SHE could not attribute such behaviour to mistakeor misapprehension of any kind.
Nothing but a thoroughchange of sentiment could account for it.
Her indignationwould have been still stronger than it was, had shenot witnessed that embarrassment which seemed to speaka consciousness of his own misconduct, and preventedher from believing him so unprincipled as to have beensporting with the affections of her sister from the first,without any design that would bear investigation.
Absence might have weakened his regard, and conveniencemight have determined him to overcome it, but that sucha regard had formerly existed she could not bring herselfto doubt.
As for Marianne, on the pangs which so unhappy a meetingmust already have given her, and on those still moresevere which might await her in its probable consequence,she could not reflect without the deepest concern.
Her own situation gained in the comparison; for while shecould ESTEEM Edward as much as ever, however they might bedivided in future, her mind might be always supported.
But every circumstance that could embitter such an evilseemed uniting to heighten the misery of Mariannein a final separation from Willoughby--in an immediateand irreconcilable rupture with him.
CHAPTER 29Before the house-maid had lit their fire the next day,or the sun gained any power over a cold, gloomy morningin January, Marianne, only half dressed, was kneelingagainst one of the window-seats for the sake of allthe little light she could command from it, and writingas fast as a continual flow of tears would permit her.
In this situation, Elinor, roused from sleep by her agitationand sobs, first perceived her; and after observing herfor a few moments with silent anxiety, said, in a toneof the most considerate gentleness,"Marianne, may I ask-?"
"No, Elinor," she replied, "ask nothing; you willsoon know all."
The sort of desperate calmness with which this was said,lasted no longer than while she spoke, and was immediatelyfollowed by a return of the same excessive affliction.
It was some minutes before she could go on with her letter,and the frequent bursts of grief which still obliged her,at intervals, to withhold her pen, were proofs enough of herfeeling how more than probable it was that she was writingfor the last time to Willoughby.
Elinor paid her every quiet and unobtrusive attentionin her power; and she would have tried to sooth andtranquilize her still more, had not Marianne entreated her,with all the eagerness of the most nervous irritability,not to speak to her for the world.
In such circumstances,it was better for both that they should not be long together;and the restless state of Marianne's mind not only preventedher from remaining in the room a moment after she was dressed,but requiring at once solitude and continual change of place,made her wander about the house till breakfast time, avoidingthe sight of every body.
At breakfast she neither ate, nor attempted to eatany thing; and Elinor's attention was then all employed,not in urging her, not in pitying her, nor in appearingto regard her, but in endeavouring to engage Mrs. Jenning'snotice entirely to herself.
As this was a favourite meal with Mrs. Jennings,it lasted a considerable time, and they were just settingthemselves, after it, round the common working table, when aletter was delivered to Marianne, which she eagerly caughtfrom the servant, and, turning of a death-like paleness,instantly ran out of the room.
Elinor, who saw as plainlyby this, as if she had seen the direction, that it mustcome from Willoughby, felt immediately such a sicknessat heart as made her hardly able to hold up her head,and sat in such a general tremour as made her fear itimpossible to escape Mrs. Jenning's notice.
That good lady,however, saw only that Marianne had received a letterfrom Willoughby, which appeared to her a very good joke,and which she treated accordingly, by hoping, with a laugh,that she would find it to her liking.
Of Elinor's distress,she was too busily employed in measuring lengths of worstedfor her rug, to see any thing at all; and calmly continuingher talk, as soon as Marianne disappeared, she said,"Upon my word, I never saw a young woman sodesperately in love in my life!
MY girls were nothingto her, and yet they used to be foolish enough; but asfor Miss Marianne, she is quite an altered creature.
I hope, from the bottom of my heart, he won't keep herwaiting much longer, for it is quite grievous to see herlook so ill and forlorn.
Pray, when are they to be married?"
Elinor, though never less disposed to speak than atthat moment, obliged herself to answer such an attackas this, and, therefore, trying to smile, replied, "And haveyou really, Ma'am, talked yourself into a persuasionof my sister's being engaged to Mr. Willoughby?
I thoughtit had been only a joke, but so serious a question seemsto imply more; and I must beg, therefore, that you will notdeceive yourself any longer.
I do assure you that nothingwould surprise me more than to hear of their being goingto be married."
"For shame, for shame, Miss Dashwood!
how can youtalk so?
Don't we all know that it must be a match, thatthey were over head and ears in love with each other fromthe first moment they met?
Did not I see them togetherin Devonshire every day, and all day long; and did not Iknow that your sister came to town with me on purposeto buy wedding clothes?
Come, come, this won't do.
Because you are so sly about it yourself, you think nobodyelse has any senses; but it is no such thing, I can tell you,for it has been known all over town this ever so long.
I tell every body of it and so does Charlotte."
"Indeed, Ma'am," said Elinor, very seriously,"you are mistaken.
Indeed, you are doing a very unkind thingin spreading the report, and you will find that you havethough you will not believe me now."
Mrs. Jennings laughed again, but Elinor had notspirits to say more, and eager at all events to knowwhat Willoughby had written, hurried away to their room,where, on opening the door, she saw Marianne stretched onthe bed, almost choked by grief, one letter in her hand,and two or three others laying by her.
Elinor drew near,but without saying a word; and seating herself on the bed,took her hand, kissed her affectionately several times,and then gave way to a burst of tears, which at firstwas scarcely less violent than Marianne's.
The latter,though unable to speak, seemed to feel all the tendernessof this behaviour, and after some time thus spent injoint affliction, she put all the letters into Elinor's hands;and then covering her face with her handkerchief,almost screamed with agony.
Elinor, who knew that such grief,shocking as it was to witness it, must have its course,watched by her till this excess of suffering had somewhatspent itself, and then turning eagerly to Willoughby's letter,read as follows:                              "Bond Street, January.
"MY DEAR MADAM,     "I have just had the honour of receiving your     letter, for which I beg to return my sincere     acknowledgments.
I am much concerned to find there     was anything in my behaviour last night that did     not meet your approbation; and though I am quite at     a loss to discover in what point I could be so     unfortunate as to offend you, I entreat your     forgiveness of what I can assure you to have been     perfectly unintentional.
I shall never reflect on     my former acquaintance with your family in Devonshire     without the most grateful pleasure, and flatter     myself it will not be broken by any mistake or     misapprehension of my actions.
My esteem for your     whole family is very sincere; but if I have been so     unfortunate as to give rise to a belief of more than     I felt, or meant to express, I shall reproach myself     for not having been more guarded in my professions     of that esteem.
That I should ever have meant more     you will allow to be impossible, when you understand     that my affections have been long engaged elsewhere,     and it will not be many weeks, I believe, before     this engagement is fulfilled.
It is with great     regret that I obey your commands in returning the     letters with which I have been honoured from you,     and the lock of hair, which you so obligingly bestowed     on me.
"I am, dear Madam,               "Your most obedient                    "humble servant,                                        "JOHN WILLOUGHBY."
With what indignation such a letter as this mustbe read by Miss Dashwood, may be imagined.
Though aware,before she began it, that it must bring a confessionof his inconstancy, and confirm their separation for ever,she was not aware that such language could be sufferedto announce it; nor could she have supposed Willoughbycapable of departing so far from the appearance of everyhonourable and delicate feeling--so far from the commondecorum of a gentleman, as to send a letter so impudentlycruel: a letter which, instead of bringing with his desireof a release any professions of regret, acknowledged nobreach of faith, denied all peculiar affection whatever--a letter of which every line was an insult, and whichproclaimed its writer to be deep in hardened villainy.
She paused over it for some time with indignantastonishment; then read it again and again; but everyperusal only served to increase her abhorrence of the man,and so bitter were her feelings against him, that shedared not trust herself to speak, lest she might woundMarianne still deeper by treating their disengagement,not as a loss to her of any possible good but as anescape from the worst and most irremediable of allevils, a connection, for life, with an unprincipled man,as a deliverance the most real, a blessing the most important.
In her earnest meditations on the contents of the letter,on the depravity of that mind which could dictate it,and probably, on the very different mind of a very differentperson, who had no other connection whatever with the affairthan what her heart gave him with every thing that passed,Elinor forgot the immediate distress of her sister,forgot that she had three letters on her lap yet unread,and so entirely forgot how long she had been in the room,that when on hearing a carriage drive up to the door,she went to the window to see who could be coming sounreasonably early, she was all astonishment to perceiveMrs. Jennings's chariot, which she knew had not beenordered till one.
Determined not to quit Marianne,though hopeless of contributing, at present, to her ease,she hurried away to excuse herself from attendingMrs. Jennings, on account of her sister being indisposed.
Mrs. Jennings, with a thoroughly good-humoured concernfor its cause, admitted the excuse most readily, and Elinor,after seeing her safe off, returned to Marianne, whom shefound attempting to rise from the bed, and whom she reachedjust in time to prevent her from falling on the floor,faint and giddy from a long want of proper rest and food;for it was many days since she had any appetite, and manynights since she had really slept; and now, when hermind was no longer supported by the fever of suspense,the consequence of all this was felt in an aching head,a weakened stomach, and a general nervous faintness.
A glass of wine, which Elinor procured for her directly,made her more comfortable, and she was at last able to expresssome sense of her kindness, by saying,"Poor Elinor!
how unhappy I make you!"
"I only wish," replied her sister, "there wereany thing I COULD do, which might be of comfort to you."
This, as every thing else would have been,was too much for Marianne, who could only exclaim,in the anguish of her heart, "Oh!
Elinor, I am miserable,indeed," before her voice was entirely lost in sobs.
Elinor could no longer witness this torrentof unresisted grief in silence.
"Exert yourself, dear Marianne," she cried,"if you would not kill yourself and all who love you.
Think of your mother; think of her misery while YOU suffer:for her sake you must exert yourself."
"I cannot, I cannot," cried Marianne; "leave me,leave me, if I distress you; leave me, hate me, forget me!
but do not torture me so.
Oh!
how easy for those,who have no sorrow of their own to talk of exertion!
Happy,happy Elinor, YOU cannot have an idea of what I suffer."
"Do you call ME happy, Marianne?
Ah!
if you knew!--Andcan you believe me to be so, while I see you so wretched!"
"Forgive me, forgive me," throwing her arms roundher sister's neck; "I know you feel for me; I know whata heart you have; but yet you are--you must be happy;Edward loves you--what, oh what, can do away such happinessas that?"
"Many, many circumstances," said Elinor, solemnly.
"No, no, no," cried Marianne wildly, "he loves you,and only you.
You CAN have no grief."
"I can have no pleasure while I see you in this state."
"And you will never see me otherwise.
Mine isa misery which nothing can do away."
"You must not talk so, Marianne.
Have you nocomforts?
no friends?
Is your loss such as leavesno opening for consolation?
Much as you suffer now,think of what you would have suffered if the discoveryof his character had been delayed to a later period--if your engagement had been carried on for months and months,as it might have been, before he chose to put an end to it.
Every additional day of unhappy confidence, on your side,would have made the blow more dreadful."
"Engagement!"
cried Marianne, "there has beenno engagement."
"No engagement!"
"No, he is not so unworthy as you believe him.
He has broken no faith with me."
"But he told you that he loved you."
"Yes--no--never absolutely.
It was every day implied,but never professedly declared.
Sometimes I thought ithad been--but it never was."
"Yet you wrote to him?"
--"Yes--could that be wrong after all that had passed?--But I cannot talk."
Elinor said no more, and turning again to the threeletters which now raised a much stronger curiositythan before, directly ran over the contents of all.
The first, which was what her sister had sent himon their arrival in town, was to this effect.
Berkeley Street, January.
"How surprised you will be, Willoughby, on     receiving this; and I think you will feel something     more than surprise, when you know that I am in town.
An opportunity of coming hither, though with Mrs.     Jennings, was a temptation we could not resist.
I wish you may receive this in time to come here     to-night, but I will not depend on it.
At any rate     I shall expect you to-morrow.
For the present, adieu.
"M.D."
Her second note, which had been written on the morningafter the dance at the Middletons', was in these words:--     "I cannot express my disappointment in having     missed you the day before yesterday, nor my astonishment     at not having received any answer to a note which     I sent you above a week ago.
I have been expecting     to hear from you, and still more to see you, every     hour of the day.
Pray call again as soon as possible,     and explain the reason of my having expected this     in vain.
You had better come earlier another time,     because we are generally out by one.
We were last     night at Lady Middleton's, where there was a dance.
I have been told that you were asked to be of the     party.
But could it be so?
You must be very much     altered indeed since we parted, if that could be     the case, and you not there.
But I will not suppose     this possible, and I hope very soon to receive your     personal assurance of its being otherwise.
"M.D."
The contents of her last note to him were these:--     "What am I to imagine, Willoughby, by your     behaviour last night?
Again I demand an explanation     of it.
I was prepared to meet you with the pleasure     which our separation naturally produced, with the     familiarity which our intimacy at Barton appeared     to me to justify.
I was repulsed indeed!
I have     passed a wretched night in endeavouring to excuse     a conduct which can scarcely be called less than     insulting; but though I have not yet been able to     form any reasonable apology for your behaviour,     I am perfectly ready to hear your justification of     it.
You have perhaps been misinformed, or purposely     deceived, in something concerning me, which may have     lowered me in your opinion.
Tell me what it is,     explain the grounds on which you acted, and I shall     be satisfied, in being able to satisfy you.
It     would grieve me indeed to be obliged to think ill     of you; but if I am to do it, if I am to learn that     you are not what we have hitherto believed you, that     your regard for us all was insincere, that your     behaviour to me was intended only to deceive, let     it be told as soon as possible.
My feelings are at     present in a state of dreadful indecision; I wish     to acquit you, but certainty on either side will be     ease to what I now suffer.
If your sentiments are     no longer what they were, you will return my notes,     and the lock of my hair which is in your possession.
"M.D."
That such letters, so full of affection and confidence,could have been so answered, Elinor, for Willoughby's sake,would have been unwilling to believe.
But her condemnationof him did not blind her to the impropriety of theirhaving been written at all; and she was silently grievingover the imprudence which had hazarded such unsolicitedproofs of tenderness, not warranted by anything preceding,and most severely condemned by the event, when Marianne,perceiving that she had finished the letters, observed toher that they contained nothing but what any one wouldhave written in the same situation.
"I felt myself," she added, "to be as solemnlyengaged to him, as if the strictest legal covenanthad bound us to each other."
"I can believe it," said Elinor; "but unfortunatelyhe did not feel the same."
"He DID feel the same, Elinor--for weeks and weeks hefelt it.
I know he did.
Whatever may have changed him now, (andnothing but the blackest art employed against me can have doneit), I was once as dear to him as my own soul could wish.
This lock of hair, which now he can so readily give up,was begged of me with the most earnest supplication.
Had you seen his look, his manner, had you heard his voiceat that moment!
Have you forgot the last evening of ourbeing together at Barton?
The morning that we partedtoo!
When he told me that it might be many weeks beforewe met again--his distress--can I ever forget his distress?"
For a moment or two she could say no more;but when this emotion had passed away, she added,in a firmer tone,"Elinor, I have been cruelly used; but not by Willoughby."
"Dearest Marianne, who but himself?
By whom can hehave been instigated?"
"By all the world, rather than by his own heart.
I could rather believe every creature of my acquaintanceleagued together to ruin me in his opinion, than believehis nature capable of such cruelty.
This woman of whom hewrites--whoever she be--or any one, in short, but your owndear self, mama, and Edward, may have been so barbarousto bely me.
Beyond you three, is there a creaturein the world whom I would not rather suspect of evilthan Willoughby, whose heart I know so well?"
Elinor would not contend, and only replied,"Whoever may have been so detestably your enemy, let thembe cheated of their malignant triumph, my dear sister,by seeing how nobly the consciousness of your owninnocence and good intentions supports your spirits.
It is a reasonable and laudable pride which resistssuch malevolence."
"No, no," cried Marianne, "misery such as mine hasno pride.
I care not who knows that I am wretched.
The triumph of seeing me so may be open to all the world.
Elinor, Elinor, they who suffer little may be proud andindependent as they like--may resist insult, or returnmortification--but I cannot.
I must feel--I must bewretched--and they are welcome to enjoy the consciousnessof it that can."
"But for my mother's sake and mine--""I would do more than for my own.
But to appearhappy when I am so miserable--Oh!
who can require it?"
Again they were both silent.
Elinor was employedin walking thoughtfully from the fire to the window,from the window to the fire, without knowing that shereceived warmth from one, or discerning objects throughthe other; and Marianne, seated at the foot of the bed,with her head leaning against one of its posts,again took up Willoughby's letter, and, after shudderingover every sentence, exclaimed--"It is too much!
Oh, Willoughby, Willoughby, could thisbe yours!
Cruel, cruel--nothing can acquit you.
Elinor,nothing can.
Whatever he might have heard against me--ought he not to have suspended his belief?
ought he not tohave told me of it, to have given me the power of clearingmyself?
'The lock of hair, (repeating it from the letter,)which you so obligingly bestowed on me'--That is unpardonable.
Willoughby, where was your heart when you wrote those words?
Oh, barbarously insolent!--Elinor, can he be justified?"
"No, Marianne, in no possible way."
"And yet this woman--who knows what her art mayhave been?--how long it may have been premeditated,and how deeply contrived by her!--Who is she?--Who canshe be?--Whom did I ever hear him talk of as young andattractive among his female acquaintance?--Oh!
no one,no one--he talked to me only of myself."
Another pause ensued; Marianne was greatly agitated,and it ended thus.
"Elinor, I must go home.
I must go and comfort mama.
Can not we be gone to-morrow?"
"To-morrow, Marianne!"
"Yes, why should I stay here?
I came only forWilloughby's sake--and now who cares for me?
Who regards me?"
"It would be impossible to go to-morrow.
We oweMrs. Jennings much more than civility; and civility ofthe commonest kind must prevent such a hasty removal as that."
"Well then, another day or two, perhaps; but I cannotstay here long, I cannot stay to endure the questionsand remarks of all these people.
The Middletons andPalmers--how am I to bear their pity?
The pity of sucha woman as Lady Middleton!
Oh, what would HE say to that!"
Elinor advised her to lie down again, and for amoment she did so; but no attitude could give her ease;and in restless pain of mind and body she moved from oneposture to another, till growing more and more hysterical,her sister could with difficulty keep her on the bed at all,and for some time was fearful of being constrained to callfor assistance.
Some lavender drops, however, which shewas at length persuaded to take, were of use; and fromthat time till Mrs. Jennings returned, she continuedon the bed quiet and motionless.
CHAPTER 30Mrs. Jennings came immediately to their room on her return,and without waiting to have her request of admittance answered,opened the door and walked in with a look of real concern.
"How do you do my dear?"
--said she in a voice of greatcompassion to Marianne, who turned away her face withoutattempting to answer.
"How is she, Miss Dashwood?--Poor thing!
she looks very bad.--No wonder.
Ay, it is but too true.
He is to be marriedvery soon--a good-for-nothing fellow!
I have no patiencewith him.
Mrs. Taylor told me of it half an hour ago,and she was told it by a particular friend of MissGrey herself, else I am sure I should not have believed it;and I was almost ready to sink as it was.
Well, said I,all I can say is, that if this be true, he has useda young lady of my acquaintance abominably ill, and Iwish with all my soul his wife may plague his heart out.
And so I shall always say, my dear, you may depend on it.
I have no notion of men's going on in this way; and if everI meet him again, I will give him such a dressing as hehas not had this many a day.
But there is one comfort,my dear Miss Marianne; he is not the only young manin the world worth having; and with your pretty faceyou will never want admirers.
Well, poor thing!
I won'tdisturb her any longer, for she had better have her cryout at once and have done with.
The Parrys and Sandersonsluckily are coming tonight you know, and that will amuse her."
She then went away, walking on tiptoe out of the room,as if she supposed her young friend's affliction couldbe increased by noise.
Marianne, to the surprise of her sister,determined on dining with them.
Elinor even advisedher against it.
But "no, she would go down; she couldbear it very well, and the bustle about her wouldbe less."
Elinor, pleased to have her governed for amoment by such a motive, though believing it hardlypossible that she could sit out the dinner, said no more;and adjusting her dress for her as well as she could,while Marianne still remained on the bed, was readyto assist her into the dining room as soon as they weresummoned to it.
When there, though looking most wretchedly,she ate more and was calmer than her sister had expected.
Had she tried to speak, or had she been conscious of halfMrs. Jennings's well-meant but ill-judged attentionsto her, this calmness could not have been maintained;but not a syllable escaped her lips; and the abstractionof her thoughts preserved her in ignorance of every thingthat was passing before her.
Elinor, who did justice to Mrs. Jennings's kindness,though its effusions were often distressing, and sometimesalmost ridiculous, made her those acknowledgments,and returned her those civilities, which her sister couldnot make or return for herself.
Their good friend sawthat Marianne was unhappy, and felt that every thingwas due to her which might make her at all less so.
She treated her therefore, with all the indulgent fondnessof a parent towards a favourite child on the last day ofits holidays.
Marianne was to have the best place by the fire,was to be tempted to eat by every delicacy in the house,and to be amused by the relation of all the news of the day.
Had not Elinor, in the sad countenance of her sister,seen a check to all mirth, she could have been entertainedby Mrs. Jennings's endeavours to cure a disappointment in love,by a variety of sweetmeats and olives, and a good fire.
As soon, however, as the consciousness of all this wasforced by continual repetition on Marianne, she couldstay no longer.
With a hasty exclamation of Misery,and a sign to her sister not to follow her, she directly gotup and hurried out of the room.
"Poor soul!"
cried Mrs. Jennings, as soon as she was gone,"how it grieves me to see her!
And I declare if she isnot gone away without finishing her wine!
And the driedcherries too!
Lord!
nothing seems to do her any good.
I am sure if I knew of any thing she would like, I wouldsend all over the town for it.
Well, it is the oddestthing to me, that a man should use such a pretty girlso ill!
But when there is plenty of money on one side,and next to none on the other, Lord bless you!
they careno more about such things!--""The lady then--Miss Grey I think you called her--is very rich?"
"Fifty thousand pounds, my dear.
Did you ever seeher?
a smart, stylish girl they say, but not handsome.
I remember her aunt very well, Biddy Henshawe; she marrieda very wealthy man.
But the family are all rich together.
Fifty thousand pounds!
and by all accounts, it won't comebefore it's wanted; for they say he is all to pieces.
No wonder!
dashing about with his curricle and hunters!
Well, it don't signify talking; but when a young man,be who he will, comes and makes love to a pretty girl,and promises marriage, he has no business to fly offfrom his word only because he grows poor, and a richergirl is ready to have him.
Why don't he, in such a case,sell his horses, let his house, turn off his servants,and make a thorough reform at once?
I warrant you,Miss Marianne would have been ready to wait till matterscame round.
But that won't do now-a-days; nothing in theway of pleasure can ever be given up by the young men ofthis age."
"Do you know what kind of a girl Miss Grey is?
Is she said to be amiable?"
"I never heard any harm of her; indeed I hardly everheard her mentioned; except that Mrs. Taylor did saythis morning, that one day Miss Walker hinted to her,that she believed Mr. and Mrs. Ellison would not be sorryto have Miss Grey married, for she and Mrs. Ellison couldnever agree."
--"And who are the Ellisons?"
"Her guardians, my dear.
But now she is of ageand may choose for herself; and a pretty choice she hasmade!--What now," after pausing a moment--"your poor sisteris gone to her own room, I suppose, to moan by herself.
Is there nothing one can get to comfort her?
Poor dear,it seems quite cruel to let her be alone.
Well, by-and-by weshall have a few friends, and that will amuse her a little.
What shall we play at?
She hates whist I know; but is thereno round game she cares for?"
"Dear ma'am, this kindness is quite unnecessary.
Marianne, I dare say, will not leave her room againthis evening.
I shall persuade her if I can to goearly to bed, for I am sure she wants rest."
"Aye, I believe that will be best for her.
Let her nameher own supper, and go to bed.
Lord!
no wonder she hasbeen looking so bad and so cast down this last week or two,for this matter I suppose has been hanging over her head aslong as that.
And so the letter that came today finished it!
Poor soul!
I am sure if I had had a notion of it,I would not have joked her about it for all my money.
But then you know, how should I guess such a thing?
I madesure of its being nothing but a common love letter, andyou know young people like to be laughed at about them.
Lord!
how concerned Sir John and my daughters will be when theyhear it!
If I had my senses about me I might have calledin Conduit Street in my way home, and told them of it.
But I shall see them tomorrow."
"It would be unnecessary I am sure, for you to cautionMrs. Palmer and Sir John against ever naming Mr. Willoughby,or making the slightest allusion to what has passed,before my sister.
Their own good-nature must point outto them the real cruelty of appearing to know any thingabout it when she is present; and the less that may everbe said to myself on the subject, the more my feelingswill be spared, as you my dear madam will easily believe."
"Oh!
Lord!
yes, that I do indeed.
It must be terriblefor you to hear it talked of; and as for your sister,I am sure I would not mention a word about it to herfor the world.
You saw I did not all dinner time.
No more would Sir John, nor my daughters, for they areall very thoughtful and considerate; especially if Igive them a hint, as I certainly will.
For my part,I think the less that is said about such things, the better,the sooner 'tis blown over and forgot.
And what doestalking ever do you know?"
"In this affair it can only do harm; more soperhaps than in many cases of a similar kind, for ithas been attended by circumstances which, for the sakeof every one concerned in it, make it unfit to becomethe public conversation.
I must do THIS justice toMr. Willoughby--he has broken no positive engagementwith my sister."
"Law, my dear!
Don't pretend to defend him.
No positive engagement indeed!
after taking her allover Allenham House, and fixing on the very rooms theywere to live in hereafter!"
Elinor, for her sister's sake, could not press thesubject farther, and she hoped it was not required of herfor Willoughby's; since, though Marianne might lose much,he could gain very little by the enforcement of the real truth.
After a short silence on both sides, Mrs. Jennings,with all her natural hilarity, burst forth again.
"Well, my dear, 'tis a true saying about an ill-wind,for it will be all the better for Colonel Brandon.
He will have her at last; aye, that he will.
Mind me,now, if they an't married by Mid-summer.
Lord!
how he'llchuckle over this news!
I hope he will come tonight.
It will be all to one a better match for your sister.
Two thousand a year without debt or drawback--exceptthe little love-child, indeed; aye, I had forgot her;but she may be 'prenticed out at a small cost, and thenwhat does it signify?
Delaford is a nice place, I cantell you; exactly what I call a nice old fashioned place,full of comforts and conveniences; quite shut in with greatgarden walls that are covered with the best fruit-treesin the country; and such a mulberry tree in one corner!
Lord!
how Charlotte and I did stuff the only time wewere there!
Then, there is a dove-cote, some delightfulstew-ponds, and a very pretty canal; and every thing,in short, that one could wish for; and, moreover, it isclose to the church, and only a quarter of a mile fromthe turnpike-road, so 'tis never dull, for if you onlygo and sit up in an old yew arbour behind the house,you may see all the carriages that pass along.
Oh!
'tis a nice place!
A butcher hard by in the village,and the parsonage-house within a stone's throw.
To my fancy, a thousand times prettier than Barton Park,where they are forced to send three miles for their meat,and have not a neighbour nearer than your mother.
Well, I shall spirit up the Colonel as soon as I can.
One shoulder of mutton, you know, drives another down.
If we CAN but put Willoughby out of her head!"
"Ay, if we can do THAT, Ma'am," said Elinor,"we shall do very well with or without Colonel Brandon."
And then rising, she went away to join Marianne,whom she found, as she expected, in her own room, leaning,in silent misery, over the small remains of a fire,which, till Elinor's entrance, had been her only light.
"You had better leave me," was all the noticethat her sister received from her.
"I will leave you," said Elinor, "if you will goto bed."
But this, from the momentary perversenessof impatient suffering, she at first refused to do.
Her sister's earnest, though gentle persuasion, however,soon softened her to compliance, and Elinor saw herlay her aching head on the pillow, and as she hoped,in a way to get some quiet rest before she left her.
In the drawing-room, whither she then repaired,she was soon joined by Mrs. Jennings, with a wine-glass,full of something, in her hand.
"My dear," said she, entering, "I have just recollectedthat I have some of the finest old Constantia wine in thehouse that ever was tasted, so I have brought a glass of itfor your sister.
My poor husband!
how fond he was of it!
Whenever he had a touch of his old colicky gout, he saidit did him more good than any thing else in the world.
Do take it to your sister."
"Dear Ma'am," replied Elinor, smiling at the differenceof the complaints for which it was recommended, "how goodyou are!
But I have just left Marianne in bed, and, I hope,almost asleep; and as I think nothing will be of so muchservice to her as rest, if you will give me leave,I will drink the wine myself."
Mrs. Jennings, though regretting that she had not beenfive minutes earlier, was satisfied with the compromise;and Elinor, as she swallowed the chief of it, reflected,that though its effects on a colicky gout were, at present,of little importance to her, its healing powers,on a disappointed heart might be as reasonably triedon herself as on her sister.
Colonel Brandon came in while the party were at tea,and by his manner of looking round the room for Marianne,Elinor immediately fancied that he neither expectednor wished to see her there, and, in short, that hewas already aware of what occasioned her absence.
Mrs. Jennings was not struck by the same thought;for soon after his entrance, she walked across the roomto the tea-table where Elinor presided, and whispered--"The Colonel looks as grave as ever you see.
He knowsnothing of it; do tell him, my dear."
He shortly afterwards drew a chair close to her's,and, with a look which perfectly assured her of hisgood information, inquired after her sister.
"Marianne is not well," said she.
"She has beenindisposed all day, and we have persuaded her to go to bed."
"Perhaps, then," he hesitatingly replied, "what Iheard this morning may be--there may be more truth in itthan I could believe possible at first."
"What did you hear?"
"That a gentleman, whom I had reason to think--in short,that a man, whom I KNEW to be engaged--but how shall Itell you?
If you know it already, as surely you must,I may be spared."
"You mean," answered Elinor, with forced calmness,"Mr. Willoughby's marriage with Miss Grey.
Yes, we DOknow it all.
This seems to have been a day of generalelucidation, for this very morning first unfolded it to us.
Mr. Willoughby is unfathomable!
Where did you hear it?"
"In a stationer's shop in Pall Mall, where Ihad business.
Two ladies were waiting for their carriage,and one of them was giving the other an account of theintended match, in a voice so little attempting concealment,that it was impossible for me not to hear all.
The nameof Willoughby, John Willoughby, frequently repeated,first caught my attention; and what followed was a positiveassertion that every thing was now finally settledrespecting his marriage with Miss Grey--it was no longerto be a secret--it would take place even within a few weeks,with many particulars of preparations and other matters.
One thing, especially, I remember, because it servedto identify the man still more:--as soon as the ceremonywas over, they were to go to Combe Magna, his seatin Somersetshire.
My astonishment!--but it would beimpossible to describe what I felt.
The communicativelady I learnt, on inquiry, for I stayed in the shoptill they were gone, was a Mrs. Ellison, and that, as Ihave been since informed, is the name of Miss Grey's guardian."
"It is.
But have you likewise heard that Miss Greyhas fifty thousand pounds?
In that, if in any thing,we may find an explanation."
"It may be so; but Willoughby is capable--at leastI think"--he stopped a moment; then added in a voicewhich seemed to distrust itself, "And your sister--how did she--""Her sufferings have been very severe.
I haveonly to hope that they may be proportionately short.
It has been, it is a most cruel affliction.
Till yesterday,I believe, she never doubted his regard; and even now,perhaps--but I am almost convinced that he never wasreally attached to her.
He has been very deceitful!
and,in some points, there seems a hardness of heart about him."
"Ah!"
said Colonel Brandon, "there is, indeed!
Butyour sister does not--I think you said so--she doesnot consider quite as you do?"
"You know her disposition, and may believe how eagerlyshe would still justify him if she could."
He made no answer; and soon afterwards, by the removalof the tea-things, and the arrangement of the card parties,the subject was necessarily dropped.
Mrs. Jennings, who hadwatched them with pleasure while they were talking, and whoexpected to see the effect of Miss Dashwood's communication,in such an instantaneous gaiety on Colonel Brandon's side,as might have become a man in the bloom of youth, of hopeand happiness, saw him, with amazement, remain the wholeevening more serious and thoughtful than usual.
CHAPTER 31From a night of more sleep than she had expected,Marianne awoke the next morning to the same consciousnessof misery in which she had closed her eyes.
Elinor encouraged her as much as possible to talkof what she felt; and before breakfast was ready, they hadgone through the subject again and again; and with the samesteady conviction and affectionate counsel on Elinor's side,the same impetuous feelings and varying opinions onMarianne's, as before.
Sometimes she could believeWilloughby to be as unfortunate and as innocent as herself,and at others, lost every consolation in the impossibilityof acquitting him.
At one moment she was absolutelyindifferent to the observation of all the world, at anothershe would seclude herself from it for ever, and at a thirdcould resist it with energy.
In one thing, however,she was uniform, when it came to the point, in avoiding,where it was possible, the presence of Mrs. Jennings,and in a determined silence when obliged to endure it.
Her heart was hardened against the belief of Mrs. Jennings'sentering into her sorrows with any compassion.
"No, no, no, it cannot be," she cried;"she cannot feel.
Her kindness is not sympathy;her good-nature is not tenderness.
All that she wantsis gossip, and she only likes me now because I supply it."
Elinor had not needed this to be assured of the injusticeto which her sister was often led in her opinion of others,by the irritable refinement of her own mind, and the toogreat importance placed by her on the delicacies of astrong sensibility, and the graces of a polished manner.
Like half the rest of the world, if more than half therebe that are clever and good, Marianne, with excellentabilities and an excellent disposition, was neitherreasonable nor candid.
She expected from other peoplethe same opinions and feelings as her own, and she judgedof their motives by the immediate effect of their actionson herself.
Thus a circumstance occurred, while thesisters were together in their own room after breakfast,which sunk the heart of Mrs. Jennings still lowerin her estimation; because, through her own weakness,it chanced to prove a source of fresh pain to herself,though Mrs. Jennings was governed in it by an impulseof the utmost goodwill.
With a letter in her outstretched hand, and countenancegaily smiling, from the persuasion of bringing comfort,she entered their room, saying,"Now, my dear, I bring you something that I am surewill do you good."
Marianne heard enough.
In one moment her imaginationplaced before her a letter from Willoughby, full of tendernessand contrition, explanatory of all that had passed, satisfactory,convincing; and instantly followed by Willoughby himself,rushing eagerly into the room to inforce, at her feet,by the eloquence of his eyes, the assurances of his letter.
The work of one moment was destroyed by the next.
The hand writing of her mother, never till then unwelcome,was before her; and, in the acuteness of the disappointmentwhich followed such an ecstasy of more than hope,she felt as if, till that instant, she had never suffered.
The cruelty of Mrs. Jennings no language, withinher reach in her moments of happiest eloquence,could have expressed; and now she could reproach heronly by the tears which streamed from her eyes withpassionate violence--a reproach, however, so entirelylost on its object, that after many expressions of pity,she withdrew, still referring her to the letter of comfort.
But the letter, when she was calm enough to read it,brought little comfort.
Willoughby filled every page.
Her mother, still confident of their engagement, and relyingas warmly as ever on his constancy, had only been rousedby Elinor's application, to intreat from Marianne greateropenness towards them both; and this, with such tendernesstowards her, such affection for Willoughby, and sucha conviction of their future happiness in each other,that she wept with agony through the whole of it.
All her impatience to be at home again now returned;her mother was dearer to her than ever; dearer throughthe very excess of her mistaken confidence in Willoughby,and she was wildly urgent to be gone.
Elinor, unable herselfto determine whether it were better for Marianne to bein London or at Barton, offered no counsel of her ownexcept of patience till their mother's wishes could be known;and at length she obtained her sister's consent to waitfor that knowledge.
Mrs. Jennings left them earlier than usual; for shecould not be easy till the Middletons and Palmers were ableto grieve as much as herself; and positively refusingElinor's offered attendance, went out alone for the restof the morning.
Elinor, with a very heavy heart, aware ofthe pain she was going to communicate, and perceiving,by Marianne's letter, how ill she had succeeded in layingany foundation for it, then sat down to write her motheran account of what had passed, and entreat her directionsfor the future; while Marianne, who came into the drawing-roomon Mrs. Jennings's going away, remained fixed at the tablewhere Elinor wrote, watching the advancement of her pen,grieving over her for the hardship of such a task,and grieving still more fondly over its effect on her mother.
In this manner they had continued about a quarterof an hour, when Marianne, whose nerves could not thenbear any sudden noise, was startled by a rap at the door.
"Who can this be?"
cried Elinor.
"So early too!
Ithought we HAD been safe."
Marianne moved to the window--"It is Colonel Brandon!"
said she, with vexation.
"We are never safe from HIM."
"He will not come in, as Mrs. Jennings is from home."
"I will not trust to THAT," retreating to her own room.
"A man who has nothing to do with his own time has noconscience in his intrusion on that of others."
The event proved her conjecture right, though itwas founded on injustice and error; for Colonel BrandonDID come in; and Elinor, who was convinced thatsolicitude for Marianne brought him thither, and who sawTHAT solicitude in his disturbed and melancholy look,and in his anxious though brief inquiry after her,could not forgive her sister for esteeming him so lightly.
"I met Mrs. Jennings in Bond Street," said he,after the first salutation, "and she encouraged meto come on; and I was the more easily encouraged,because I thought it probable that I might find you alone,which I was very desirous of doing.
My object--mywish--my sole wish in desiring it--I hope, I believeit is--is to be a means of giving comfort;--no, I mustnot say comfort--not present comfort--but conviction,lasting conviction to your sister's mind.
My regard for her,for yourself, for your mother--will you allow me to prove it,by relating some circumstances which nothing but a VERYsincere regard--nothing but an earnest desire of beinguseful--I think I am justified--though where so many hourshave been spent in convincing myself that I am right,is there not some reason to fear I may be wrong?"
He stopped.
"I understand you," said Elinor.
"You have somethingto tell me of Mr. Willoughby, that will open his characterfarther.
Your telling it will be the greatest act of friendshipthat can be shewn Marianne.
MY gratitude will be insuredimmediately by any information tending to that end, and HERSmust be gained by it in time.
Pray, pray let me hear it."
"You shall; and, to be brief, when I quitted Bartonlast October,--but this will give you no idea--I must gofarther back.
You will find me a very awkward narrator,Miss Dashwood; I hardly know where to begin.
A shortaccount of myself, I believe, will be necessary, and itSHALL be a short one.
On such a subject," sighing heavily,"can I have little temptation to be diffuse."
He stopt a moment for recollection, and then,with another sigh, went on.
"You have probably entirely forgotten a conversation--(it is not to be supposed that it could make any impressionon you)--a conversation between us one evening at BartonPark--it was the evening of a dance--in which I alludedto a lady I had once known, as resembling, in some measure,your sister Marianne."
"Indeed," answered Elinor, "I have NOT forgotten it."
He looked pleased by this remembrance, and added,"If I am not deceived by the uncertainty, the partialityof tender recollection, there is a very strong resemblancebetween them, as well in mind as person.
The same warmthof heart, the same eagerness of fancy and spirits.
This lady was one of my nearest relations, an orphan fromher infancy, and under the guardianship of my father.
Our ages were nearly the same, and from our earliest yearswe were playfellows and friends.
I cannot remember thetime when I did not love Eliza; and my affection for her,as we grew up, was such, as perhaps, judging from mypresent forlorn and cheerless gravity, you might think meincapable of having ever felt.
Her's, for me, was, I believe,fervent as the attachment of your sister to Mr. Willoughbyand it was, though from a different cause, no less unfortunate.
At seventeen she was lost to me for ever.
She wasmarried--married against her inclination to my brother.
Her fortune was large, and our family estate much encumbered.
And this, I fear, is all that can be said for theconduct of one, who was at once her uncle and guardian.
My brother did not deserve her; he did not even love her.
I had hoped that her regard for me would support herunder any difficulty, and for some time it did; but atlast the misery of her situation, for she experiencedgreat unkindness, overcame all her resolution, and thoughshe had promised me that nothing--but how blindly Irelate!
I have never told you how this was brought on.
We were within a few hours of eloping together for Scotland.
The treachery, or the folly, of my cousin's maid betrayed us.
I was banished to the house of a relation far distant,and she was allowed no liberty, no society, no amusement,till my father's point was gained.
I had depended on herfortitude too far, and the blow was a severe one--but had her marriage been happy, so young as I then was,a few months must have reconciled me to it, or at leastI should not have now to lament it.
This howeverwas not the case.
My brother had no regard for her;his pleasures were not what they ought to have been,and from the first he treated her unkindly.
The consequenceof this, upon a mind so young, so lively, so inexperiencedas Mrs. Brandon's, was but too natural.
She resignedherself at first to all the misery of her situation;and happy had it been if she had not lived to overcome thoseregrets which the remembrance of me occasioned.
But can wewonder that, with such a husband to provoke inconstancy,and without a friend to advise or restrain her (formy father lived only a few months after their marriage,and I was with my regiment in the East Indies) sheshould fall?
Had I remained in England, perhaps--but Imeant to promote the happiness of both by removingfrom her for years, and for that purpose had procuredmy exchange.
The shock which her marriage had given me,"he continued, in a voice of great agitation, "was oftrifling weight--was nothing to what I felt when I heard,about two years afterwards, of her divorce.
It wasTHAT which threw this gloom,--even now the recollectionof what I suffered--"He could say no more, and rising hastily walked for a fewminutes about the room.
Elinor, affected by his relation,and still more by his distress, could not speak.
He sawher concern, and coming to her, took her hand, pressed it,and kissed it with grateful respect.
A few minutes moreof silent exertion enabled him to proceed with composure.
"It was nearly three years after this unhappyperiod before I returned to England.
My first care,when I DID arrive, was of course to seek for her;but the search was as fruitless as it was melancholy.
I could not trace her beyond her first seducer, and therewas every reason to fear that she had removed from himonly to sink deeper in a life of sin.
Her legal allowancewas not adequate to her fortune, nor sufficient for hercomfortable maintenance, and I learnt from my brother thatthe power of receiving it had been made over some monthsbefore to another person.
He imagined, and calmly could heimagine it, that her extravagance, and consequent distress,had obliged her to dispose of it for some immediate relief.
At last, however, and after I had been six months in England,I DID find her.
Regard for a former servant of my own,who had since fallen into misfortune, carried me to visithim in a spunging-house, where he was confined for debt;and there, the same house, under a similar confinement,was my unfortunate sister.
So altered--so faded--worndown by acute suffering of every kind!
hardly could Ibelieve the melancholy and sickly figure before me,to be the remains of the lovely, blooming, healthful girl,on whom I had once doted.
What I endured in so beholdingher--but I have no right to wound your feelings by attemptingto describe it--I have pained you too much already.
That she was, to all appearance, in the last stageof a consumption, was--yes, in such a situation it wasmy greatest comfort.
Life could do nothing for her,beyond giving time for a better preparation for death;and that was given.
I saw her placed in comfortable lodgings,and under proper attendants; I visited her every dayduring the rest of her short life: I was with her in herlast moments."
Again he stopped to recover himself; and Elinorspoke her feelings in an exclamation of tender concern,at the fate of his unfortunate friend.
"Your sister, I hope, cannot be offended," said he,"by the resemblance I have fancied between her and mypoor disgraced relation.
Their fates, their fortunes,cannot be the same; and had the natural sweetdisposition of the one been guarded by a firmer mind,or a happier marriage, she might have been all that youwill live to see the other be.
But to what does all thislead?
I seem to have been distressing you for nothing.
Ah!
Miss Dashwood--a subject such as this--untouchedfor fourteen years--it is dangerous to handle it at all!
I WILL be more collected--more concise.
She left to my careher only child, a little girl, the offspring of her firstguilty connection, who was then about three years old.
She loved the child, and had always kept it with her.
It was a valued, a precious trust to me; and gladlywould I have discharged it in the strictest sense,by watching over her education myself, had the natureof our situations allowed it; but I had no family, no home;and my little Eliza was therefore placed at school.
I saw her there whenever I could, and after the death of mybrother, (which happened about five years ago, and whichleft to me the possession of the family property,) shevisited me at Delaford.
I called her a distant relation;but I am well aware that I have in general been suspectedof a much nearer connection with her.
It is now threeyears ago (she had just reached her fourteenth year,)that I removed her from school, to place her under the careof a very respectable woman, residing in Dorsetshire,who had the charge of four or five other girls of aboutthe same time of life; and for two years I had every reasonto be pleased with her situation.
But last February,almost a twelvemonth back, she suddenly disappeared.
I had allowed her, (imprudently, as it has since turnedout,) at her earnest desire, to go to Bath with one ofher young friends, who was attending her father therefor his health.
I knew him to be a very good sort of man,and I thought well of his daughter--better than she deserved,for, with a most obstinate and ill-judged secrecy,she would tell nothing, would give no clue, though shecertainly knew all.
He, her father, a well-meaning,but not a quick-sighted man, could really, I believe,give no information; for he had been generally confinedto the house, while the girls were ranging over the townand making what acquaintance they chose; and he triedto convince me, as thoroughly as he was convinced himself,of his daughter's being entirely unconcerned in the business.
In short, I could learn nothing but that she was gone;all the rest, for eight long months, was left to conjecture.
What I thought, what I feared, may be imagined; and what Isuffered too."
"Good heavens!"
cried Elinor, "could it be--couldWilloughby!"
--"The first news that reached me of her," he continued,"came in a letter from herself, last October.
It was forwarded to me from Delaford, and I received iton the very morning of our intended party to Whitwell;and this was the reason of my leaving Barton so suddenly,which I am sure must at the time have appeared strangeto every body, and which I believe gave offence to some.
Little did Mr. Willoughby imagine, I suppose, when hislooks censured me for incivility in breaking up the party,that I was called away to the relief of one whom hehad made poor and miserable; but HAD he known it,what would it have availed?
Would he have been lessgay or less happy in the smiles of your sister?
No,he had already done that, which no man who CAN feelfor another would do.
He had left the girl whoseyouth and innocence he had seduced, in a situation ofthe utmost distress, with no creditable home, no help,no friends, ignorant of his address!
He had left her,promising to return; he neither returned, nor wrote,nor relieved her."
"This is beyond every thing!"
exclaimed Elinor.
"His character is now before you; expensive, dissipated,and worse than both.
Knowing all this, as I have nowknown it many weeks, guess what I must have felt on seeingyour sister as fond of him as ever, and on being assuredthat she was to marry him: guess what I must have feltfor all your sakes.
When I came to you last week andfound you alone, I came determined to know the truth;though irresolute what to do when it WAS known.
My behaviour must have seemed strange to you then;but now you will comprehend it.
To suffer you all to beso deceived; to see your sister--but what could I do?
I had no hope of interfering with success; and sometimesI thought your sister's influence might yet reclaim him.
But now, after such dishonorable usage, who can tell whatwere his designs on her.
Whatever they may have been,however, she may now, and hereafter doubtless WILLturn with gratitude towards her own condition, when shecompares it with that of my poor Eliza, when she considersthe wretched and hopeless situation of this poor girl,and pictures her to herself, with an affection for him so strong,still as strong as her own, and with a mind tormentedby self-reproach, which must attend her through life.
Surely this comparison must have its use with her.
She will feel her own sufferings to be nothing.
Theyproceed from no misconduct, and can bring no disgrace.
On the contrary, every friend must be made still moreher friend by them.
Concern for her unhappiness,and respect for her fortitude under it, must strengthenevery attachment.
Use your own discretion, however,in communicating to her what I have told you.
You mustknow best what will be its effect; but had I not seriously,and from my heart believed it might be of service,might lessen her regrets, I would not have sufferedmyself to trouble you with this account of my familyafflictions, with a recital which may seem to have beenintended to raise myself at the expense of others."
Elinor's thanks followed this speech with gratefulearnestness; attended too with the assurance of herexpecting material advantage to Marianne, from thecommunication of what had passed.
"I have been more pained," said she, "by herendeavors to acquit him than by all the rest; for itirritates her mind more than the most perfect convictionof his unworthiness can do.
Now, though at first shewill suffer much, I am sure she will soon become easier.
Have you," she continued, after a short silence,"ever seen Mr. Willoughby since you left him at Barton?"
"Yes," he replied gravely, "once I have.
One meetingwas unavoidable."
Elinor, startled by his manner, looked at him anxiously,saying,"What?
have you met him to--""I could meet him no other way.
Eliza had confessedto me, though most reluctantly, the name of her lover;and when he returned to town, which was within a fortnightafter myself, we met by appointment, he to defend,I to punish his conduct.
We returned unwounded,and the meeting, therefore, never got abroad."
Elinor sighed over the fancied necessity of this;but to a man and a soldier she presumed not to censure it.
"Such," said Colonel Brandon, after a pause,"has been the unhappy resemblance between the fate of motherand daughter!
and so imperfectly have I discharged my trust!"
"Is she still in town?"
"No; as soon as she recovered from her lying-in,for I found her near her delivery, I removed her and herchild into the country, and there she remains."
Recollecting, soon afterwards, that he was probablydividing Elinor from her sister, he put an end to his visit,receiving from her again the same grateful acknowledgments,and leaving her full of compassion and esteem for him.
CHAPTER 32When the particulars of this conversation were repeatedby Miss Dashwood to her sister, as they very soon were,the effect on her was not entirely such as the formerhad hoped to see.
Not that Marianne appeared to distrustthe truth of any part of it, for she listened to it allwith the most steady and submissive attention, made neitherobjection nor remark, attempted no vindication of Willoughby,and seemed to shew by her tears that she felt it tobe impossible.
But though this behaviour assured Elinorthat the conviction of this guilt WAS carried home toher mind, though she saw with satisfaction the effect of it,in her no longer avoiding Colonel Brandon when he called,in her speaking to him, even voluntarily speaking,with a kind of compassionate respect, and though shesaw her spirits less violently irritated than before,she did not see her less wretched.
Her mind did becomesettled, but it was settled in a gloomy dejection.
She felt the loss of Willoughby's character yet more heavilythan she had felt the loss of his heart; his seduction anddesertion of Miss Williams, the misery of that poor girl,and the doubt of what his designs might ONCE have beenon herself, preyed altogether so much on her spirits,that she could not bring herself to speak of what she felteven to Elinor; and, brooding over her sorrows in silence,gave more pain to her sister than could have been communicatedby the most open and most frequent confession of them.
To give the feelings or the language of Mrs. Dashwoodon receiving and answering Elinor's letter would be onlyto give a repetition of what her daughters had already feltand said; of a disappointment hardly less painful thanMarianne's, and an indignation even greater than Elinor's.
Long letters from her, quickly succeeding each other,arrived to tell all that she suffered and thought;to express her anxious solicitude for Marianne, and entreatshe would bear up with fortitude under this misfortune.
Bad indeed must the nature of Marianne's affliction be,when her mother could talk of fortitude!
mortifyingand humiliating must be the origin of those regrets,which SHE could wish her not to indulge!
Against the interest of her own individual comfort,Mrs. Dashwood had determined that it would be better forMarianne to be any where, at that time, than at Barton,where every thing within her view would be bringing backthe past in the strongest and most afflicting manner,by constantly placing Willoughby before her, such asshe had always seen him there.
She recommended it toher daughters, therefore, by all means not to shorten theirvisit to Mrs. Jennings; the length of which, though neverexactly fixed, had been expected by all to comprise at leastfive or six weeks.
A variety of occupations, of objects,and of company, which could not be procured at Barton,would be inevitable there, and might yet, she hoped,cheat Marianne, at times, into some interest beyond herself,and even into some amusement, much as the ideas of bothmight now be spurned by her.
From all danger of seeing Willoughby again,her mother considered her to be at least equally safein town as in the country, since his acquaintance mustnow be dropped by all who called themselves her friends.
Design could never bring them in each other's way:negligence could never leave them exposed to a surprise;and chance had less in its favour in the crowd of Londonthan even in the retirement of Barton, where it mightforce him before her while paying that visit at Allenhamon his marriage, which Mrs. Dashwood, from foreseeing atfirst as a probable event, had brought herself to expectas a certain one.
She had yet another reason for wishing her childrento remain where they were; a letter from her son-in-lawhad told her that he and his wife were to be in townbefore the middle of February, and she judged it rightthat they should sometimes see their brother.
Marianne had promised to be guided by her mother's opinion,and she submitted to it therefore without opposition,though it proved perfectly different from what she wishedand expected, though she felt it to be entirely wrong,formed on mistaken grounds, and that by requiring herlonger continuance in London it deprived her of the onlypossible alleviation of her wretchedness, the personalsympathy of her mother, and doomed her to such society andsuch scenes as must prevent her ever knowing a moment's rest.
But it was a matter of great consolation to her,that what brought evil to herself would bring good toher sister; and Elinor, on the other hand, suspecting thatit would not be in her power to avoid Edward entirely,comforted herself by thinking, that though their longerstay would therefore militate against her own happiness,it would be better for Marianne than an immediate returninto Devonshire.
Her carefulness in guarding her sister from everhearing Willoughby's name mentioned, was not thrown away.
Marianne, though without knowing it herself, reaped allits advantage; for neither Mrs. Jennings, nor Sir John,nor even Mrs. Palmer herself, ever spoke of him before her.
Elinor wished that the same forbearance could have extendedtowards herself, but that was impossible, and she wasobliged to listen day after day to the indignation of them all.
Sir John, could not have thought it possible.
"A man of whom he had always had such reason to think well!
Such a good-natured fellow!
He did not believe there was abolder rider in England!
It was an unaccountable business.
He wished him at the devil with all his heart.
He wouldnot speak another word to him, meet him where he might,for all the world!
No, not if it were to be by the sideof Barton covert, and they were kept watching for twohours together.
Such a scoundrel of a fellow!
sucha deceitful dog!
It was only the last time they metthat he had offered him one of Folly's puppies!
and thiswas the end of it!"
Mrs. Palmer, in her way, was equally angry.
"She was determined to drop his acquaintance immediately,and she was very thankful that she had never been acquaintedwith him at all.
She wished with all her heart CombeMagna was not so near Cleveland; but it did not signify,for it was a great deal too far off to visit; she hatedhim so much that she was resolved never to mentionhis name again, and she should tell everybody she saw,how good-for-nothing he was."
The rest of Mrs. Palmer's sympathy was shewn in procuringall the particulars in her power of the approaching marriage,and communicating them to Elinor.
She could soon tellat what coachmaker's the new carriage was building,by what painter Mr. Willoughby's portrait was drawn,and at what warehouse Miss Grey's clothes might be seen.
The calm and polite unconcern of Lady Middletonon the occasion was a happy relief to Elinor's spirits,oppressed as they often were by the clamorous kindnessof the others.
It was a great comfort to her to be sureof exciting no interest in ONE person at least among theircircle of friends: a great comfort to know that therewas ONE who would meet her without feeling any curiosityafter particulars, or any anxiety for her sister's health.
Every qualification is raised at times, by thecircumstances of the moment, to more than its real value;and she was sometimes worried down by officious condolenceto rate good-breeding as more indispensable to comfortthan good-nature.
Lady Middleton expressed her sense of the affairabout once every day, or twice, if the subject occurredvery often, by saying, "It is very shocking, indeed!"
and by the means of this continual though gentle vent,was able not only to see the Miss Dashwoods from thefirst without the smallest emotion, but very soonto see them without recollecting a word of the matter;and having thus supported the dignity of her own sex,and spoken her decided censure of what was wrongin the other, she thought herself at liberty to attendto the interest of her own assemblies, and thereforedetermined (though rather against the opinion of Sir John)that as Mrs. Willoughby would at once be a woman of eleganceand fortune, to leave her card with her as soon as she married.
Colonel Brandon's delicate, unobtrusive enquirieswere never unwelcome to Miss Dashwood.
He had abundantlyearned the privilege of intimate discussion of hersister's disappointment, by the friendly zeal withwhich he had endeavoured to soften it, and they alwaysconversed with confidence.
His chief reward for thepainful exertion of disclosing past sorrows and presenthumiliations, was given in the pitying eye with whichMarianne sometimes observed him, and the gentlenessof her voice whenever (though it did not often happen)she was obliged, or could oblige herself to speak to him.
THESE assured him that his exertion had produced anincrease of good-will towards himself, and THESE gaveElinor hopes of its being farther augmented hereafter;but Mrs. Jennings, who knew nothing of all this, who knewonly that the Colonel continued as grave as ever, and thatshe could neither prevail on him to make the offer himself,nor commission her to make it for him, began, at theend of two days, to think that, instead of Midsummer,they would not be married till Michaelmas, and by theend of a week that it would not be a match at all.
The good understanding between the Colonel and MissDashwood seemed rather to declare that the honoursof the mulberry-tree, the canal, and the yew arbour,would all be made over to HER; and Mrs. Jennings had,for some time ceased to think at all of Mrs. Ferrars.
Early in February, within a fortnight from thereceipt of Willoughby's letter, Elinor had the painfuloffice of informing her sister that he was married.
She had taken care to have the intelligence conveyedto herself, as soon as it was known that the ceremonywas over, as she was desirous that Marianne should notreceive the first notice of it from the public papers,which she saw her eagerly examining every morning.
She received the news with resolute composure;made no observation on it, and at first shed no tears;but after a short time they would burst out, and for therest of the day, she was in a state hardly less pitiablethan when she first learnt to expect the event.
The Willoughbys left town as soon as they were married;and Elinor now hoped, as there could be no dangerof her seeing either of them, to prevail on her sister,who had never yet left the house since the blow first fell,to go out again by degrees as she had done before.
About this time the two Miss Steeles, lately arrivedat their cousin's house in Bartlett's Buildings,Holburn, presented themselves again before their moregrand relations in Conduit and Berkeley Streets;and were welcomed by them all with great cordiality.
Elinor only was sorry to see them.
Their presencealways gave her pain, and she hardly knew how to makea very gracious return to the overpowering delight of Lucyin finding her STILL in town.
"I should have been quite disappointed if I had notfound you here STILL," said she repeatedly, with a strongemphasis on the word.
"But I always thought I SHOULD.
I was almost sure you would not leave London yet awhile;though you TOLD me, you know, at Barton, that you shouldnot stay above a MONTH.
But I thought, at the time,that you would most likely change your mind when it cameto the point.
It would have been such a great pityto have went away before your brother and sister came.
And now to be sure you will be in no hurry to be gone.
I am amazingly glad you did not keep to YOUR WORD."
Elinor perfectly understood her, and was forcedto use all her self-command to make it appear that shedid NOT.
"Well, my dear," said Mrs. Jennings, "and how didyou travel?"
"Not in the stage, I assure you," replied Miss Steele,with quick exultation; "we came post all the way, and hada very smart beau to attend us.
Dr. Davies was comingto town, and so we thought we'd join him in a post-chaise;and he behaved very genteelly, and paid ten or twelveshillings more than we did."
"Oh, oh!"
cried Mrs. Jennings; "very pretty,indeed!
and the Doctor is a single man, I warrant you."
"There now," said Miss Steele, affectedly simpering,"everybody laughs at me so about the Doctor, and Icannot think why.
My cousins say they are sure I havemade a conquest; but for my part I declare I never thinkabout him from one hour's end to another.
'Lord!
herecomes your beau, Nancy,' my cousin said t'other day,when she saw him crossing the street to the house.
My beau, indeed!
said I--I cannot think who you mean.
The Doctor is no beau of mine."
"Aye, aye, that is very pretty talking--but it won't do--the Doctor is the man, I see."
"No, indeed!"
replied her cousin, with affected earnestness,"and I beg you will contradict it, if you ever hear it talkedof."
Mrs. Jennings directly gave her the gratifyingassurance that she certainly would NOT, and Miss Steelewas made completely happy.
"I suppose you will go and stay with your brotherand sister, Miss Dashwood, when they come to town,"said Lucy, returning, after a cessation of hostile hints,to the charge.
"No, I do not think we shall."
"Oh, yes, I dare say you will."
Elinor would not humour her by farther opposition.
"What a charming thing it is that Mrs. Dashwood canspare you both for so long a time together!"
"Long a time, indeed!"
interposed Mrs. Jennings.
"Why, their visit is but just begun!"
Lucy was silenced.
"I am sorry we cannot see your sister, Miss Dashwood,"said Miss Steele.
"I am sorry she is not well--"for Marianne had left the room on their arrival.
"You are very good.
My sister will be equallysorry to miss the pleasure of seeing you; but she hasbeen very much plagued lately with nervous head-aches,which make her unfit for company or conversation."
"Oh, dear, that is a great pity!
but such oldfriends as Lucy and me!--I think she might see US;and I am sure we would not speak a word."
Elinor, with great civility, declined the proposal.
Her sister was perhaps laid down upon the bed, or in herdressing gown, and therefore not able to come to them.
"Oh, if that's all," cried Miss Steele, "we canjust as well go and see HER."
Elinor began to find this impertinence too much forher temper; but she was saved the trouble of checking it,by Lucy's sharp reprimand, which now, as on many occasions,though it did not give much sweetness to the mannersof one sister, was of advantage in governing those ofthe other.
CHAPTER 33After some opposition, Marianne yielded to hersister's entreaties, and consented to go out with herand Mrs. Jennings one morning for half an hour.
Sheexpressly conditioned, however, for paying no visits,and would do no more than accompany them to Gray's inSackville Street, where Elinor was carrying on a negotiationfor the exchange of a few old-fashioned jewels of her mother.
When they stopped at the door, Mrs. Jennings recollectedthat there was a lady at the other end of the streeton whom she ought to call; and as she had no businessat Gray's, it was resolved, that while her young friendstransacted their's, she should pay her visit andreturn for them.
On ascending the stairs, the Miss Dashwoods foundso many people before them in the room, that there wasnot a person at liberty to tend to their orders; and theywere obliged to wait.
All that could be done was, to sitdown at that end of the counter which seemed to promise thequickest succession; one gentleman only was standing there,and it is probable that Elinor was not without hopeof exciting his politeness to a quicker despatch.
But the correctness of his eye, and the delicacyof his taste, proved to be beyond his politeness.
He was giving orders for a toothpick-case for himself,and till its size, shape, and ornaments were determined,all of which, after examining and debating for a quarterof an hour over every toothpick-case in the shop,were finally arranged by his own inventive fancy, he hadno leisure to bestow any other attention on the two ladies,than what was comprised in three or four very broad stares;a kind of notice which served to imprint on Elinorthe remembrance of a person and face, of strong,natural, sterling insignificance, though adorned inthe first style of fashion.
Marianne was spared from the troublesome feelingsof contempt and resentment, on this impertinent examinationof their features, and on the puppyism of his mannerin deciding on all the different horrors of the differenttoothpick-cases presented to his inspection, by remainingunconscious of it all; for she was as well able to collecther thoughts within herself, and be as ignorant of what waspassing around her, in Mr. Gray's shop, as in her own bedroom.
At last the affair was decided.
The ivory,the gold, and the pearls, all received their appointment,and the gentleman having named the last day on which hisexistence could be continued without the possession of thetoothpick-case, drew on his gloves with leisurely care,and bestowing another glance on the Miss Dashwoods, but sucha one as seemed rather to demand than express admiration,walked off with a happy air of real conceit and affectedindifference.
Elinor lost no time in bringing her business forward,was on the point of concluding it, when another gentlemanpresented himself at her side.
She turned her eyes towardshis face, and found him with some surprise to be her brother.
Their affection and pleasure in meeting was just enoughto make a very creditable appearance in Mr. Gray's shop.
John Dashwood was really far from being sorry to seehis sisters again; it rather gave them satisfaction;and his inquiries after their mother were respectfuland attentive.
Elinor found that he and Fanny had been in towntwo days.
"I wished very much to call upon you yesterday,"said he, "but it was impossible, for we were obligedto take Harry to see the wild beasts at Exeter Exchange;and we spent the rest of the day with Mrs. Ferrars.
Harry was vastly pleased.
THIS morning I had fully intendedto call on you, if I could possibly find a spare half hour,but one has always so much to do on first coming to town.
I am come here to bespeak Fanny a seal.
But tomorrow Ithink I shall certainly be able to call in Berkeley Street,and be introduced to your friend Mrs. Jennings.
I understand she is a woman of very good fortune.
And the Middletons too, you must introduce me to THEM.
As my mother-in-law's relations, I shall be happy to showthem every respect.
They are excellent neighbours to you inthe country, I understand."
"Excellent indeed.
Their attention to our comfort,their friendliness in every particular, is more than Ican express."
"I am extremely glad to hear it, upon my word;extremely glad indeed.
But so it ought to be; they arepeople of large fortune, they are related to you, andevery civility and accommodation that can serve to makeyour situation pleasant might be reasonably expected.
And so you are most comfortably settled in your little cottageand want for nothing!
Edward brought us a most charmingaccount of the place: the most complete thing of its kind,he said, that ever was, and you all seemed to enjoy it beyondany thing.
It was a great satisfaction to us to hear it,I assure you."
Elinor did feel a little ashamed of her brother;and was not sorry to be spared the necessity of answering him,by the arrival of Mrs. Jennings's servant, who came to tellher that his mistress waited for them at the door.
Mr. Dashwood attended them down stairs, was introducedto Mrs. Jennings at the door of her carriage, and repeatinghis hope of being able to call on them the next day,took leave.
His visit was duly paid.
He came with a pretence atan apology from their sister-in-law, for not coming too;"but she was so much engaged with her mother, that reallyshe had no leisure for going any where."
Mrs. Jennings,however, assured him directly, that she should not standupon ceremony, for they were all cousins, or somethinglike it, and she should certainly wait on Mrs. JohnDashwood very soon, and bring her sisters to see her.
His manners to THEM, though calm, were perfectly kind;to Mrs. Jennings, most attentively civil; and on ColonelBrandon's coming in soon after himself, he eyed him with acuriosity which seemed to say, that he only wanted to knowhim to be rich, to be equally civil to HIM.
After staying with them half an hour, he askedElinor to walk with him to Conduit Street, and introducehim to Sir John and Lady Middleton.
The weather wasremarkably fine, and she readily consented.
As soonas they were out of the house, his enquiries began.
"Who is Colonel Brandon?
Is he a man of fortune?"
"Yes; he has very good property in Dorsetshire."
"I am glad of it.
He seems a most gentlemanlike man;and I think, Elinor, I may congratulate you on the prospectof a very respectable establishment in life."
"Me, brother!
what do you mean?"
"He likes you.
I observed him narrowly, and amconvinced of it.
What is the amount of his fortune?"
"I believe about two thousand a year."
"Two thousand a-year;" and then working himselfup to a pitch of enthusiastic generosity, he added,"Elinor, I wish with all my heart it were TWICE as much,for your sake."
"Indeed I believe you," replied Elinor; "but I amvery sure that Colonel Brandon has not the smallest wishof marrying ME."
"You are mistaken, Elinor; you are very much mistaken.
A very little trouble on your side secures him.
Perhaps just at present he may be undecided; the smallnessof your fortune may make him hang back; his friendsmay all advise him against it.
But some of those littleattentions and encouragements which ladies can so easilygive will fix him, in spite of himself.
And there can beno reason why you should not try for him.
It is not to besupposed that any prior attachment on your side--in short,you know as to an attachment of that kind, it is quiteout of the question, the objections are insurmountable--you have too much sense not to see all that.
Colonel Brandonmust be the man; and no civility shall be wanting onmy part to make him pleased with you and your family.
It is a match that must give universal satisfaction.
In short, it is a kind of thing that"--lowering his voiceto an important whisper--"will be exceedingly welcometo ALL PARTIES."
Recollecting himself, however, he added,"That is, I mean to say--your friends are all trulyanxious to see you well settled; Fanny particularly,for she has your interest very much at heart, I assure you.
And her mother too, Mrs. Ferrars, a very good-natured woman,I am sure it would give her great pleasure; she said as muchthe other day."
Elinor would not vouchsafe any answer.
"It would be something remarkable, now," he continued,"something droll, if Fanny should have a brother and Ia sister settling at the same time.
And yet it is notvery unlikely."
"Is Mr. Edward Ferrars," said Elinor, with resolution,"going to be married?"
"It is not actually settled, but there is sucha thing in agitation.
He has a most excellent mother.
Mrs. Ferrars, with the utmost liberality, will come forward,and settle on him a thousand a year, if the matchtakes place.
The lady is the Hon.
Miss Morton, only daughterof the late Lord Morton, with thirty thousand pounds.
A very desirable connection on both sides, and I have nota doubt of its taking place in time.
A thousand a-yearis a great deal for a mother to give away, to make overfor ever; but Mrs. Ferrars has a noble spirit.
To giveyou another instance of her liberality:--The other day,as soon as we came to town, aware that money couldnot be very plenty with us just now, she put bank-notesinto Fanny's hands to the amount of two hundred pounds.
And extremely acceptable it is, for we must live at a greatexpense while we are here."
He paused for her assent and compassion; and sheforced herself to say,"Your expenses both in town and country must certainlybe considerable; but your income is a large one."
"Not so large, I dare say, as many people suppose.
I do not mean to complain, however; it is undoubtedlya comfortable one, and I hope will in time be better.
The enclosure of Norland Common, now carrying on,is a most serious drain.
And then I have made a littlepurchase within this half year; East Kingham Farm,you must remember the place, where old Gibson used to live.
The land was so very desirable for me in every respect,so immediately adjoining my own property, that I felt itmy duty to buy it.
I could not have answered it to myconscience to let it fall into any other hands.
A man mustpay for his convenience; and it HAS cost me a vast dealof money."
"More than you think it really and intrinsically worth."
"Why, I hope not that.
I might have sold it again,the next day, for more than I gave: but, with regard to thepurchase-money, I might have been very unfortunate indeed;for the stocks were at that time so low, that if I had nothappened to have the necessary sum in my banker's hands,I must have sold out to very great loss."
Elinor could only smile.
"Other great and inevitable expenses too we havehad on first coming to Norland.
Our respected father,as you well know, bequeathed all the Stanhill effectsthat remained at Norland (and very valuable they were)to your mother.
Far be it from me to repine at hisdoing so; he had an undoubted right to dispose of hisown property as he chose, but, in consequence of it,we have been obliged to make large purchases of linen,china, &c. to supply the place of what was taken away.
You may guess, after all these expenses, how very far wemust be from being rich, and how acceptable Mrs. Ferrars'skindness is."
"Certainly," said Elinor; "and assisted by her liberality,I hope you may yet live to be in easy circumstances."
"Another year or two may do much towards it,"he gravely replied; "but however there is still a greatdeal to be done.
There is not a stone laid of Fanny'sgreen-house, and nothing but the plan of the flower-gardenmarked out."
"Where is the green-house to be?"
"Upon the knoll behind the house.
The oldwalnut trees are all come down to make room for it.
It will be a very fine object from many parts of the park,and the flower-garden will slope down just before it,and be exceedingly pretty.
We have cleared away all the oldthorns that grew in patches over the brow."
Elinor kept her concern and her censure to herself;and was very thankful that Marianne was not present,to share the provocation.
Having now said enough to make his poverty clear,and to do away the necessity of buying a pair of ear-ringsfor each of his sisters, in his next visit at Gray'shis thoughts took a cheerfuller turn, and he began tocongratulate Elinor on having such a friend as Mrs. Jennings.
"She seems a most valuable woman indeed--Her house,her style of living, all bespeak an exceeding good income;and it is an acquaintance that has not only beenof great use to you hitherto, but in the end may provematerially advantageous.--Her inviting you to town iscertainly a vast thing in your favour; and indeed, itspeaks altogether so great a regard for you, that in allprobability when she dies you will not be forgotten.--She must have a great deal to leave."
"Nothing at all, I should rather suppose; for she hasonly her jointure, which will descend to her children."
"But it is not to be imagined that she lives up toher income.
Few people of common prudence will do THAT;and whatever she saves, she will be able to dispose of."
"And do you not think it more likely that sheshould leave it to her daughters, than to us?"
"Her daughters are both exceedingly well married,and therefore I cannot perceive the necessity of herremembering them farther.
Whereas, in my opinion, by hertaking so much notice of you, and treating you in thiskind of way, she has given you a sort of claim on herfuture consideration, which a conscientious woman wouldnot disregard.
Nothing can be kinder than her behaviour;and she can hardly do all this, without being awareof the expectation it raises."
"But she raises none in those most concerned.
Indeed, brother, your anxiety for our welfare and prosperitycarries you too far."
"Why, to be sure," said he, seeming to recollect himself,"people have little, have very little in their power.
But, my dear Elinor, what is the matter with Marianne?--she looks very unwell, has lost her colour, and is grownquite thin.
Is she ill?"
"She is not well, she has had a nervous complainton her for several weeks."
"I am sorry for that.
At her time of life,any thing of an illness destroys the bloom for ever!
Her's has been a very short one!
She was as handsome a girllast September, as I ever saw; and as likely to attractthe man.
There was something in her style of beauty,to please them particularly.
I remember Fanny used to saythat she would marry sooner and better than you did;not but what she is exceedingly fond of YOU, but so ithappened to strike her.
She will be mistaken, however.
I question whether Marianne NOW, will marry a man worthmore than five or six hundred a-year, at the utmost,and I am very much deceived if YOU do not do better.
Dorsetshire!
I know very little of Dorsetshire; but, my dearElinor, I shall be exceedingly glad to know more of it;and I think I can answer for your having Fanny and myselfamong the earliest and best pleased of your visitors."
Elinor tried very seriously to convince him thatthere was no likelihood of her marrying Colonel Brandon;but it was an expectation of too much pleasure to himselfto be relinquished, and he was really resolved on seekingan intimacy with that gentleman, and promoting the marriageby every possible attention.
He had just compunctionenough for having done nothing for his sisters himself,to be exceedingly anxious that everybody else shoulddo a great deal; and an offer from Colonel Brandon,or a legacy from Mrs. Jennings, was the easiest meansof atoning for his own neglect.
They were lucky enough to find Lady Middletonat home, and Sir John came in before their visit ended.
Abundance of civilities passed on all sides.
Sir Johnwas ready to like anybody, and though Mr. Dashwood didnot seem to know much about horses, he soon set himdown as a very good-natured fellow: while Lady Middletonsaw enough of fashion in his appearance to think hisacquaintance worth having; and Mr. Dashwood went awaydelighted with both.
"I shall have a charming account to carryto Fanny," said he, as he walked back with his sister.
"Lady Middleton is really a most elegant woman!
Sucha woman as I am sure Fanny will be glad to know.
And Mrs. Jennings too, an exceedingly well-behaved woman,though not so elegant as her daughter.
Your sister neednot have any scruple even of visiting HER, which, to saythe truth, has been a little the case, and very naturally;for we only knew that Mrs. Jennings was the widow of a manwho had got all his money in a low way; and Fanny andMrs. Ferrars were both strongly prepossessed, that neithershe nor her daughters were such kind of women as Fannywould like to associate with.
But now I can carry hera most satisfactory account of both."
CHAPTER 34Mrs. John Dashwood had so much confidence in herhusband's judgment, that she waited the very next dayboth on Mrs. Jennings and her daughter; and herconfidence was rewarded by finding even the former,even the woman with whom her sisters were staying,by no means unworthy her notice; and as for Lady Middleton,she found her one of the most charming women in the world!
Lady Middleton was equally pleased with Mrs. Dashwood.
There was a kind of cold hearted selfishness on both sides,which mutually attracted them; and they sympathisedwith each other in an insipid propriety of demeanor,and a general want of understanding.
The same manners, however, which recommended Mrs. JohnDashwood to the good opinion of Lady Middleton did not suitthe fancy of Mrs. Jennings, and to HER she appeared nothingmore than a little proud-looking woman of uncordial address,who met her husband's sisters without any affection,and almost without having anything to say to them;for of the quarter of an hour bestowed on Berkeley Street,she sat at least seven minutes and a half in silence.
Elinor wanted very much to know, though she didnot chuse to ask, whether Edward was then in town;but nothing would have induced Fanny voluntarilyto mention his name before her, till able to tell herthat his marriage with Miss Morton was resolved on,or till her husband's expectations on Colonel Brandonwere answered; because she believed them still so verymuch attached to each other, that they could not be toosedulously divided in word and deed on every occasion.
The intelligence however, which SHE would not give,soon flowed from another quarter.
Lucy came very shortlyto claim Elinor's compassion on being unable to see Edward,though he had arrived in town with Mr. and Mrs. Dashwood.
He dared not come to Bartlett's Buildings for fearof detection, and though their mutual impatience to meet,was not to be told, they could do nothing at presentbut write.
Edward assured them himself of his being in town,within a very short time, by twice calling in Berkeley Street.
Twice was his card found on the table, when they returnedfrom their morning's engagements.
Elinor was pleasedthat he had called; and still more pleased that she hadmissed him.
The Dashwoods were so prodigiously delightedwith the Middletons, that, though not much in the habitof giving anything, they determined to give them--a dinner; and soon after their acquaintance began,invited them to dine in Harley Street, where they hadtaken a very good house for three months.
Their sistersand Mrs. Jennings were invited likewise, and John Dashwoodwas careful to secure Colonel Brandon, who, always gladto be where the Miss Dashwoods were, received his eagercivilities with some surprise, but much more pleasure.
They were to meet Mrs. Ferrars; but Elinor could not learnwhether her sons were to be of the party.
The expectationof seeing HER, however, was enough to make her interestedin the engagement; for though she could now meet Edward'smother without that strong anxiety which had once promisedto attend such an introduction, though she could now seeher with perfect indifference as to her opinion of herself,her desire of being in company with Mrs. Ferrars,her curiosity to know what she was like, was as lively as ever.
The interest with which she thus anticipated theparty, was soon afterwards increased, more powerfullythan pleasantly, by her hearing that the Miss Steeleswere also to be at it.
So well had they recommended themselves to Lady Middleton,so agreeable had their assiduities made them to her,that though Lucy was certainly not so elegant, and hersister not even genteel, she was as ready as Sir Johnto ask them to spend a week or two in Conduit Street;and it happened to be particularly convenient to the MissSteeles, as soon as the Dashwoods' invitation was known,that their visit should begin a few days before the partytook place.
Their claims to the notice of Mrs. John Dashwood,as the nieces of the gentleman who for many years hadhad the care of her brother, might not have done much,however, towards procuring them seats at her table;but as Lady Middleton's guests they must be welcome; and Lucy,who had long wanted to be personally known to the family,to have a nearer view of their characters and her owndifficulties, and to have an opportunity of endeavouringto please them, had seldom been happier in her life,than she was on receiving Mrs. John Dashwood's card.
On Elinor its effect was very different.
She beganimmediately to determine, that Edward who lived withhis mother, must be asked as his mother was, to a partygiven by his sister; and to see him for the first time,after all that passed, in the company of Lucy!--she hardlyknew how she could bear it!
These apprehensions, perhaps, were not foundedentirely on reason, and certainly not at all on truth.
They were relieved however, not by her own recollection,but by the good will of Lucy, who believed herself to beinflicting a severe disappointment when she told herthat Edward certainly would not be in Harley Street on Tuesday,and even hoped to be carrying the pain still fartherby persuading her that he was kept away by the extremeaffection for herself, which he could not conceal when theywere together.
The important Tuesday came that was to introducethe two young ladies to this formidable mother-in-law.
"Pity me, dear Miss Dashwood!"
said Lucy, as theywalked up the stairs together--for the Middletons arrivedso directly after Mrs. Jennings, that they all followedthe servant at the same time--"There is nobody here butyou, that can feel for me.--I declare I can hardly stand.
Good gracious!--In a moment I shall see the person that allmy happiness depends on--that is to be my mother!"
--Elinor could have given her immediate reliefby suggesting the possibility of its being Miss Morton's mother,rather than her own, whom they were about to behold;but instead of doing that, she assured her, and withgreat sincerity, that she did pity her--to the utteramazement of Lucy, who, though really uncomfortable herself,hoped at least to be an object of irrepressible envy to Elinor.
Mrs. Ferrars was a little, thin woman, upright,even to formality, in her figure, and serious,even to sourness, in her aspect.
Her complexion was sallow;and her features small, without beauty, and naturallywithout expression; but a lucky contraction of the browhad rescued her countenance from the disgrace of insipidity,by giving it the strong characters of pride and ill nature.
She was not a woman of many words; for, unlike peoplein general, she proportioned them to the number ofher ideas; and of the few syllables that did escape her,not one fell to the share of Miss Dashwood, whom she eyedwith the spirited determination of disliking her at all events.
Elinor could not NOW be made unhappy by this behaviour.--A few months ago it would have hurt her exceedingly; but itwas not in Mrs. Ferrars' power to distress her by it now;--and the difference of her manners to the Miss Steeles,a difference which seemed purposely made to humble her more,only amused her.
She could not but smile to see the graciousnessof both mother and daughter towards the very person--for Lucy was particularly distinguished--whom of all others,had they known as much as she did, they would have been mostanxious to mortify; while she herself, who had comparativelyno power to wound them, sat pointedly slighted by both.
But while she smiled at a graciousness so misapplied,she could not reflect on the mean-spirited folly fromwhich it sprung, nor observe the studied attentionswith which the Miss Steeles courted its continuance,without thoroughly despising them all four.
Lucy was all exultation on being so honorablydistinguished; and Miss Steele wanted only to be teazedabout Dr. Davies to be perfectly happy.
The dinner was a grand one, the servants were numerous,and every thing bespoke the Mistress's inclinationfor show, and the Master's ability to support it.
In spite of the improvements and additions which weremaking to the Norland estate, and in spite of its ownerhaving once been within some thousand pounds of beingobliged to sell out at a loss, nothing gave any symptomof that indigence which he had tried to infer from it;--no poverty of any kind, except of conversation, appeared--but there, the deficiency was considerable.
John Dashwoodhad not much to say for himself that was worth hearing,and his wife had still less.
But there was no peculiardisgrace in this; for it was very much the case withthe chief of their visitors, who almost all labouredunder one or other of these disqualifications for beingagreeable--Want of sense, either natural or improved--wantof elegance--want of spirits--or want of temper.
When the ladies withdrew to the drawing-roomafter dinner, this poverty was particularly evident,for the gentlemen HAD supplied the discourse with somevariety--the variety of politics, inclosing land,and breaking horses--but then it was all over; and onesubject only engaged the ladies till coffee came in,which was the comparative heights of Harry Dashwood,and Lady Middleton's second son William, who were nearlyof the same age.
Had both the children been there, the affair mighthave been determined too easily by measuring them at once;but as Harry only was present, it was all conjecturalassertion on both sides; and every body had a right tobe equally positive in their opinion, and to repeat itover and over again as often as they liked.
The parties stood thus:The two mothers, though each really convinced thather own son was the tallest, politely decided in favourof the other.
The two grandmothers, with not less partiality,but more sincerity, were equally earnest in supportof their own descendant.
Lucy, who was hardly less anxious to please one parentthan the other, thought the boys were both remarkably tallfor their age, and could not conceive that there couldbe the smallest difference in the world between them;and Miss Steele, with yet greater address gave it,as fast as she could, in favour of each.
Elinor, having once delivered her opinion onWilliam's side, by which she offended Mrs. Ferrars andFanny still more, did not see the necessity of enforcingit by any farther assertion; and Marianne, when calledon for her's, offended them all, by declaring that shehad no opinion to give, as she had never thought about it.
Before her removing from Norland, Elinor had painteda very pretty pair of screens for her sister-in-law,which being now just mounted and brought home,ornamented her present drawing room; and these screens,catching the eye of John Dashwood on his followingthe other gentlemen into the room, were officiouslyhanded by him to Colonel Brandon for his admiration.
"These are done by my eldest sister," said he; "and you,as a man of taste, will, I dare say, be pleased with them.
I do not know whether you have ever happened to see anyof her performances before, but she is in general reckonedto draw extremely well."
The Colonel, though disclaiming all pretensionsto connoisseurship, warmly admired the screens, as hewould have done any thing painted by Miss Dashwood;and on the curiosity of the others being of course excited,they were handed round for general inspection.
Mrs. Ferrars, not aware of their being Elinor's work,particularly requested to look at them; and after they hadreceived gratifying testimony of Lady Middletons's approbation,Fanny presented them to her mother, considerately informingher, at the same time, that they were done by Miss Dashwood.
"Hum"--said Mrs. Ferrars--"very pretty,"--and withoutregarding them at all, returned them to her daughter.
Perhaps Fanny thought for a moment that her motherhad been quite rude enough,--for, colouring a little,she immediately said,"They are very pretty, ma'am--an't they?"
But then again,the dread of having been too civil, too encouraging herself,probably came over her, for she presently added,"Do you not think they are something in MissMorton's style of painting, Ma'am?--She DOES paint mostdelightfully!--How beautifully her last landscape is done!"
"Beautifully indeed!
But SHE does every thing well."
Marianne could not bear this.--She was alreadygreatly displeased with Mrs. Ferrars; and such ill-timedpraise of another, at Elinor's expense, though shehad not any notion of what was principally meant by it,provoked her immediately to say with warmth,"This is admiration of a very particular kind!--what is Miss Morton to us?--who knows, or who cares,for her?--it is Elinor of whom WE think and speak."
And so saying, she took the screens out of hersister-in-law's hands, to admire them herself as theyought to be admired.
Mrs. Ferrars looked exceedingly angry, and drawingherself up more stiffly than ever, pronounced in retortthis bitter philippic, "Miss Morton is Lord Morton's daughter."
Fanny looked very angry too, and her husband wasall in a fright at his sister's audacity.
Elinor wasmuch more hurt by Marianne's warmth than she had beenby what produced it; but Colonel Brandon's eyes, as theywere fixed on Marianne, declared that he noticed onlywhat was amiable in it, the affectionate heart which couldnot bear to see a sister slighted in the smallest point.
Marianne's feelings did not stop here.
The coldinsolence of Mrs. Ferrars's general behaviour to her sister,seemed, to her, to foretell such difficulties and distressesto Elinor, as her own wounded heart taught her to thinkof with horror; and urged by a strong impulse ofaffectionate sensibility, she moved after a moment,to her sister's chair, and putting one arm round her neck,and one cheek close to hers, said in a low, but eager,voice,"Dear, dear Elinor, don't mind them.
Don't let themmake YOU unhappy."
She could say no more; her spirits were quite overcome,and hiding her face on Elinor's shoulder, she burstinto tears.
Every body's attention was called, and almostevery body was concerned.--Colonel Brandon rose up and wentto them without knowing what he did.--Mrs.
Jennings,with a very intelligent "Ah!
poor dear," immediately gaveher her salts; and Sir John felt so desperately enragedagainst the author of this nervous distress, that heinstantly changed his seat to one close by Lucy Steele,and gave her, in a whisper, a brief account of the wholeshocking affair.
In a few minutes, however, Marianne was recoveredenough to put an end to the bustle, and sit down amongthe rest; though her spirits retained the impressionof what had passed, the whole evening.
"Poor Marianne!"
said her brother to Colonel Brandon,in a low voice, as soon as he could secure his attention,--"She has not such good health as her sister,--she is verynervous,--she has not Elinor's constitution;--and one mustallow that there is something very trying to a young womanwho HAS BEEN a beauty in the loss of her personal attractions.
You would not think it perhaps, but Marianne WAS remarkablyhandsome a few months ago; quite as handsome as Elinor.--Now you see it is all gone."
CHAPTER 35Elinor's curiosity to see Mrs. Ferrars was satisfied.--She had found in her every thing that could tend to makea farther connection between the families undesirable.--She had seen enough of her pride, her meanness, and herdetermined prejudice against herself, to comprehend allthe difficulties that must have perplexed the engagement,and retarded the marriage, of Edward and herself, had he beenotherwise free;--and she had seen almost enough to be thankfulfor her OWN sake, that one greater obstacle preserved herfrom suffering under any other of Mrs. Ferrars's creation,preserved her from all dependence upon her caprice, or anysolicitude for her good opinion.
Or at least, if she did notbring herself quite to rejoice in Edward's being fetteredto Lucy, she determined, that had Lucy been more amiable,she OUGHT to have rejoiced.
She wondered that Lucy's spirits could be so very muchelevated by the civility of Mrs. Ferrars;--that her interestand her vanity should so very much blind her as to makethe attention which seemed only paid her because she wasNOT ELINOR, appear a compliment to herself--or to allowher to derive encouragement from a preference only given her,because her real situation was unknown.
But that it was so,had not only been declared by Lucy's eyes at the time,but was declared over again the next morning more openly,for at her particular desire, Lady Middleton set her downin Berkeley Street on the chance of seeing Elinor alone,to tell her how happy she was.
The chance proved a lucky one, for a message fromMrs. Palmer soon after she arrived, carried Mrs. Jennings away.
"My dear friend," cried Lucy, as soon as they wereby themselves, "I come to talk to you of my happiness.
Could anything be so flattering as Mrs. Ferrars's wayof treating me yesterday?
So exceeding affable as shewas!--You know how I dreaded the thoughts of seeing her;--but the very moment I was introduced, there was such anaffability in her behaviour as really should seem to say,she had quite took a fancy to me.
Now was not it so?--You saw it all; and was not you quite struck with it?"
"She was certainly very civil to you."
"Civil!--Did you see nothing but only civility?--I saw a vast deal more.
Such kindness as fell to the shareof nobody but me!--No pride, no hauteur, and your sisterjust the same--all sweetness and affability!"
Elinor wished to talk of something else, but Lucy stillpressed her to own that she had reason for her happiness;and Elinor was obliged to go on.--"Undoubtedly, if they had known your engagement,"said she, "nothing could be more flattering than theirtreatment of you;--but as that was not the case"--"I guessed you would say so"--replied Lucyquickly--"but there was no reason in the world whyMrs. Ferrars should seem to like me, if she did not,and her liking me is every thing.
You shan't talk meout of my satisfaction.
I am sure it will all end well,and there will be no difficulties at all, to what Iused to think.
Mrs. Ferrars is a charming woman,and so is your sister.
They are both delightful women,indeed!--I wonder I should never hear you say how agreeableMrs. Dashwood was!"
To this Elinor had no answer to make, and did notattempt any.
"Are you ill, Miss Dashwood?--you seem low--youdon't speak;--sure you an't well."
"I never was in better health."
"I am glad of it with all my heart; but really you didnot look it.
I should be sorry to have YOU ill; you, that havebeen the greatest comfort to me in the world!--Heavenknows what I should have done without your friendship."
--Elinor tried to make a civil answer, though doubtingher own success.
But it seemed to satisfy Lucy, for shedirectly replied,"Indeed I am perfectly convinced of your regardfor me, and next to Edward's love, it is the greatestcomfort I have.--Poor Edward!--But now there is onegood thing, we shall be able to meet, and meet pretty often,for Lady Middleton's delighted with Mrs. Dashwood,so we shall be a good deal in Harley Street, I dare say,and Edward spends half his time with his sister--besides,Lady Middleton and Mrs. Ferrars will visit now;--and Mrs. Ferrars and your sister were both so good to saymore than once, they should always be glad to see me.--They are such charming women!--I am sure if ever youtell your sister what I think of her, you cannot speaktoo high."
But Elinor would not give her any encouragementto hope that she SHOULD tell her sister.
Lucy continued.
"I am sure I should have seen it in a moment,if Mrs. Ferrars had took a dislike to me.
If she had onlymade me a formal courtesy, for instance, without sayinga word, and never after had took any notice of me,and never looked at me in a pleasant way--you knowwhat I mean--if I had been treated in that forbiddingsort of way, I should have gave it all up in despair.
I could not have stood it.
For where she DOES dislike,I know it is most violent."
Elinor was prevented from making any reply to thiscivil triumph, by the door's being thrown open, the servant'sannouncing Mr. Ferrars, and Edward's immediately walking in.
It was a very awkward moment; and the countenance of eachshewed that it was so.
They all looked exceedingly foolish;and Edward seemed to have as great an inclination to walkout of the room again, as to advance farther into it.
The very circumstance, in its unpleasantest form,which they would each have been most anxious to avoid,had fallen on them.--They were not only all three together,but were together without the relief of any other person.
The ladies recovered themselves first.
It was not Lucy'sbusiness to put herself forward, and the appearance ofsecrecy must still be kept up.
She could therefore onlyLOOK her tenderness, and after slightly addressing him,said no more.
But Elinor had more to do; and so anxious was she,for his sake and her own, to do it well, that sheforced herself, after a moment's recollection,to welcome him, with a look and manner that were almost easy,and almost open; and another struggle, another effort stillimproved them.
She would not allow the presence of Lucy,nor the consciousness of some injustice towards herself,to deter her from saying that she was happy to see him,and that she had very much regretted being from home,when he called before in Berkeley Street.
She wouldnot be frightened from paying him those attentions which,as a friend and almost a relation, were his due, by theobservant eyes of Lucy, though she soon perceived themto be narrowly watching her.
Her manners gave some re-assurance to Edward, and hehad courage enough to sit down; but his embarrassment stillexceeded that of the ladies in a proportion, which the caserendered reasonable, though his sex might make it rare;for his heart had not the indifference of Lucy's, norcould his conscience have quite the ease of Elinor's.
Lucy, with a demure and settled air, seemed determinedto make no contribution to the comfort of the others,and would not say a word; and almost every thing that WASsaid, proceeded from Elinor, who was obliged to volunteerall the information about her mother's health, their comingto town, &c. which Edward ought to have inquired about,but never did.
Her exertions did not stop here; for she soonafterwards felt herself so heroically disposed asto determine, under pretence of fetching Marianne,to leave the others by themselves; and she really did it,and THAT in the handsomest manner, for she loitered awayseveral minutes on the landing-place, with the mosthigh-minded fortitude, before she went to her sister.
When that was once done, however, it was time for the rapturesof Edward to cease; for Marianne's joy hurried her intothe drawing-room immediately.
Her pleasure in seeing himwas like every other of her feelings, strong in itself,and strongly spoken.
She met him with a hand that wouldbe taken, and a voice that expressed the affection of a sister.
"Dear Edward!"
she cried, "this is a moment of greathappiness!--This would almost make amends for every thing?"
Edward tried to return her kindness as it deserved,but before such witnesses he dared not say half what hereally felt.
Again they all sat down, and for a momentor two all were silent; while Marianne was looking with themost speaking tenderness, sometimes at Edward and sometimesat Elinor, regretting only that their delight in eachother should be checked by Lucy's unwelcome presence.
Edward was the first to speak, and it was to noticeMarianne's altered looks, and express his fear of hernot finding London agree with her.
"Oh, don't think of me!"
she replied with spiritedearnestness, though her eyes were filled with tearsas she spoke, "don't think of MY health.
Elinor is well,you see.
That must be enough for us both."
This remark was not calculated to make Edward orElinor more easy, nor to conciliate the good will of Lucy,who looked up at Marianne with no very benignant expression.
"Do you like London?"
said Edward, willing to sayany thing that might introduce another subject.
"Not at all.
I expected much pleasure in it,but I have found none.
The sight of you, Edward, is theonly comfort it has afforded; and thank Heaven!
youare what you always were!"
She paused--no one spoke.
"I think, Elinor," she presently added, "we mustemploy Edward to take care of us in our return to Barton.
In a week or two, I suppose, we shall be going; and, I trust,Edward will not be very unwilling to accept the charge."
Poor Edward muttered something, but what it was,nobody knew, not even himself.
But Marianne, who sawhis agitation, and could easily trace it to whatevercause best pleased herself, was perfectly satisfied,and soon talked of something else.
"We spent such a day, Edward, in Harley Streetyesterday!
So dull, so wretchedly dull!--But I have muchto say to you on that head, which cannot be said now."
And with this admirable discretion did she deferthe assurance of her finding their mutual relatives moredisagreeable than ever, and of her being particularlydisgusted with his mother, till they were more in private.
"But why were you not there, Edward?--Why did younot come?"
"I was engaged elsewhere."
"Engaged!
But what was that, when such friendswere to be met?"
"Perhaps, Miss Marianne," cried Lucy, eager to takesome revenge on her, "you think young men never standupon engagements, if they have no mind to keep them,little as well as great."
Elinor was very angry, but Marianne seemed entirelyinsensible of the sting; for she calmly replied,"Not so, indeed; for, seriously speaking, I am verysure that conscience only kept Edward from Harley Street.
And I really believe he HAS the most delicate consciencein the world; the most scrupulous in performingevery engagement, however minute, and however itmay make against his interest or pleasure.
He is themost fearful of giving pain, of wounding expectation,and the most incapable of being selfish, of any bodyI ever saw.
Edward, it is so, and I will say it.
What!
are you never to hear yourself praised!--Then youmust be no friend of mine; for those who will acceptof my love and esteem, must submit to my open commendation."
The nature of her commendation, in the present case,however, happened to be particularly ill-suited to thefeelings of two thirds of her auditors, and was so veryunexhilarating to Edward, that he very soon got up to go away.
"Going so soon!"
said Marianne; "my dear Edward,this must not be."
And drawing him a little aside, she whisperedher persuasion that Lucy could not stay much longer.
But even this encouragement failed, for he would go;and Lucy, who would have outstaid him, had his visit lastedtwo hours, soon afterwards went away.
"What can bring her here so often?"
said Marianne,on her leaving them.
"Could not she see that we wantedher gone!--how teazing to Edward!"
"Why so?--we were all his friends, and Lucy has beenthe longest known to him of any.
It is but naturalthat he should like to see her as well as ourselves."
Marianne looked at her steadily, and said, "You know,Elinor, that this is a kind of talking which I cannot bear.
If you only hope to have your assertion contradicted,as I must suppose to be the case, you ought to recollectthat I am the last person in the world to do it.
I cannot descend to be tricked out of assurances, that arenot really wanted."
She then left the room; and Elinor dared not followher to say more, for bound as she was by her promiseof secrecy to Lucy, she could give no information thatwould convince Marianne; and painful as the consequencesof her still continuing in an error might be, she wasobliged to submit to it.
All that she could hope, wasthat Edward would not often expose her or himself to thedistress of hearing Marianne's mistaken warmth, nor to therepetition of any other part of the pain that had attendedtheir recent meeting--and this she had every reason to expect.
CHAPTER 36Within a few days after this meeting, the newspapersannounced to the world, that the lady of Thomas Palmer,Esq.
was safely delivered of a son and heir; a veryinteresting and satisfactory paragraph, at least to allthose intimate connections who knew it before.
This event, highly important to Mrs. Jennings's happiness,produced a temporary alteration in the disposal of her time,and influenced, in a like degree, the engagementsof her young friends; for as she wished to be as muchas possible with Charlotte, she went thither every morningas soon as she was dressed, and did not return till latein the evening; and the Miss Dashwoods, at the particularrequest of the Middletons, spent the whole of every day,in every day in Conduit Street.
For their own comfortthey would much rather have remained, at least allthe morning, in Mrs. Jennings's house; but it was nota thing to be urged against the wishes of everybody.
Their hours were therefore made over to Lady Middletonand the two Miss Steeles, by whom their company, in factwas as little valued, as it was professedly sought.
They had too much sense to be desirable companionsto the former; and by the latter they were considered witha jealous eye, as intruding on THEIR ground, and sharingthe kindness which they wanted to monopolize.
Though nothingcould be more polite than Lady Middleton's behaviour toElinor and Marianne, she did not really like them at all.
Because they neither flattered herself nor her children,she could not believe them good-natured; and because theywere fond of reading, she fancied them satirical: perhapswithout exactly knowing what it was to be satirical;but THAT did not signify.
It was censure in common use,and easily given.
Their presence was a restraint both on her and on Lucy.
It checked the idleness of one, and the business of the other.
Lady Middleton was ashamed of doing nothing before them,and the flattery which Lucy was proud to think ofand administer at other times, she feared they would despiseher for offering.
Miss Steele was the least discomposedof the three, by their presence; and it was in their powerto reconcile her to it entirely.
Would either of themonly have given her a full and minute account of the wholeaffair between Marianne and Mr. Willoughby, she wouldhave thought herself amply rewarded for the sacrificeof the best place by the fire after dinner, which theirarrival occasioned.
But this conciliation was not granted;for though she often threw out expressions of pity for hersister to Elinor, and more than once dropt a reflectionon the inconstancy of beaux before Marianne, no effectwas produced, but a look of indifference from the former,or of disgust in the latter.
An effort even yet lightermight have made her their friend.
Would they only havelaughed at her about the Doctor!
But so little were they,anymore than the others, inclined to oblige her,that if Sir John dined from home, she might spend a wholeday without hearing any other raillery on the subject,than what she was kind enough to bestow on herself.
All these jealousies and discontents, however, were sototally unsuspected by Mrs. Jennings, that she thoughtit a delightful thing for the girls to be together;and generally congratulated her young friends every night,on having escaped the company of a stupid old woman so long.
She joined them sometimes at Sir John's, sometimesat her own house; but wherever it was, she always camein excellent spirits, full of delight and importance,attributing Charlotte's well doing to her own care, and readyto give so exact, so minute a detail of her situation,as only Miss Steele had curiosity enough to desire.
One thing DID disturb her; and of that she made herdaily complaint.
Mr. Palmer maintained the common,but unfatherly opinion among his sex, of all infants being alike;and though she could plainly perceive, at different times,the most striking resemblance between this baby and everyone of his relations on both sides, there was no convincinghis father of it; no persuading him to believe that itwas not exactly like every other baby of the same age;nor could he even be brought to acknowledge the simpleproposition of its being the finest child in the world.
I come now to the relation of a misfortune,which about this time befell Mrs. John Dashwood.
It so happened that while her two sisters withMrs. Jennings were first calling on her in Harley Street,another of her acquaintance had dropt in--a circumstancein itself not apparently likely to produce evil to her.
But while the imaginations of other people will carrythem away to form wrong judgments of our conduct,and to decide on it by slight appearances, one's happinessmust in some measure be always at the mercy of chance.
In the present instance, this last-arrived lady allowedher fancy to so far outrun truth and probability,that on merely hearing the name of the Miss Dashwoods,and understanding them to be Mr. Dashwood's sisters,she immediately concluded them to be staying in Harley Street;and this misconstruction produced within a dayor two afterwards, cards of invitation for themas well as for their brother and sister, to a smallmusical party at her house.
The consequence of which was,that Mrs. John Dashwood was obliged to submit not onlyto the exceedingly great inconvenience of sending hercarriage for the Miss Dashwoods, but, what was still worse,must be subject to all the unpleasantness of appearingto treat them with attention: and who could tell that theymight not expect to go out with her a second time?
The powerof disappointing them, it was true, must always be her's.
But that was not enough; for when people are determinedon a mode of conduct which they know to be wrong, they feelinjured by the expectation of any thing better from them.
Marianne had now been brought by degrees, so muchinto the habit of going out every day, that it was becomea matter of indifference to her, whether she went or not:and she prepared quietly and mechanically for everyevening's engagement, though without expecting the smallestamusement from any, and very often without knowing,till the last moment, where it was to take her.
To her dress and appearance she was grown so perfectlyindifferent, as not to bestow half the consideration on it,during the whole of her toilet, which it received fromMiss Steele in the first five minutes of their beingtogether, when it was finished.
Nothing escaped HER minuteobservation and general curiosity; she saw every thing,and asked every thing; was never easy till she knew the priceof every part of Marianne's dress; could have guessed thenumber of her gowns altogether with better judgment thanMarianne herself, and was not without hopes of finding outbefore they parted, how much her washing cost per week,and how much she had every year to spend upon herself.
The impertinence of these kind of scrutinies, moreover,was generally concluded with a compliment, whichthough meant as its douceur, was considered by Marianneas the greatest impertinence of all; for after undergoingan examination into the value and make of her gown,the colour of her shoes, and the arrangement of her hair,she was almost sure of being told that upon "her wordshe looked vastly smart, and she dared to say she wouldmake a great many conquests."
With such encouragement as this, was she dismissedon the present occasion, to her brother's carriage;which they were ready to enter five minutes after itstopped at the door, a punctuality not very agreeableto their sister-in-law, who had preceded them to the houseof her acquaintance, and was there hoping for some delayon their part that might inconvenience either herselfor her coachman.
The events of this evening were not very remarkable.
The party, like other musical parties, comprehended agreat many people who had real taste for the performance,and a great many more who had none at all; and the performersthemselves were, as usual, in their own estimation,and that of their immediate friends, the first privateperformers in England.
As Elinor was neither musical, nor affecting to be so,she made no scruple of turning her eyes from the grandpianoforte, whenever it suited her, and unrestrained evenby the presence of a harp, and violoncello, would fixthem at pleasure on any other object in the room.
In oneof these excursive glances she perceived among a groupof young men, the very he, who had given them a lectureon toothpick-cases at Gray's.
She perceived him soonafterwards looking at herself, and speaking familiarlyto her brother; and had just determined to find out hisname from the latter, when they both came towards her,and Mr. Dashwood introduced him to her as Mr. Robert Ferrars.
He addressed her with easy civility, and twistedhis head into a bow which assured her as plainly aswords could have done, that he was exactly the coxcombshe had heard him described to be by Lucy.
Happy hadit been for her, if her regard for Edward had dependedless on his own merit, than on the merit of his nearestrelations!
For then his brother's bow must have giventhe finishing stroke to what the ill-humour of his motherand sister would have begun.
But while she wonderedat the difference of the two young men, she did not findthat the emptiness of conceit of the one, put her outof all charity with the modesty and worth of the other.
Why they WERE different, Robert exclaimed to her himselfin the course of a quarter of an hour's conversation;for, talking of his brother, and lamenting the extremeGAUCHERIE which he really believed kept him from mixingin proper society, he candidly and generously attributed itmuch less to any natural deficiency, than to the misfortuneof a private education; while he himself, though probablywithout any particular, any material superiorityby nature, merely from the advantage of a public school,was as well fitted to mix in the world as any other man.
"Upon my soul," he added, "I believe it is nothing more;and so I often tell my mother, when she is grievingabout it.
'My dear Madam,' I always say to her, 'you mustmake yourself easy.
The evil is now irremediable,and it has been entirely your own doing.
Why wouldyou be persuaded by my uncle, Sir Robert, against yourown judgment, to place Edward under private tuition,at the most critical time of his life?
If you had only senthim to Westminster as well as myself, instead of sendinghim to Mr. Pratt's, all this would have been prevented.'
This is the way in which I always consider the matter,and my mother is perfectly convinced of her error."
Elinor would not oppose his opinion, because,whatever might be her general estimation of the advantageof a public school, she could not think of Edward'sabode in Mr. Pratt's family, with any satisfaction.
"You reside in Devonshire, I think,"--was hisnext observation, "in a cottage near Dawlish."
Elinor set him right as to its situation;and it seemed rather surprising to him that anybodycould live in Devonshire, without living near Dawlish.
He bestowed his hearty approbation however on theirspecies of house.
"For my own part," said he, "I am excessively fondof a cottage; there is always so much comfort, so muchelegance about them.
And I protest, if I had any moneyto spare, I should buy a little land and build one myself,within a short distance of London, where I might drivemyself down at any time, and collect a few friendsabout me, and be happy.
I advise every body who is goingto build, to build a cottage.
My friend Lord Courtlandcame to me the other day on purpose to ask my advice,and laid before me three different plans of Bonomi's.
I was to decide on the best of them.
'My dear Courtland,'said I, immediately throwing them all into the fire, 'do notadopt either of them, but by all means build a cottage.'
And that I fancy, will be the end of it.
"Some people imagine that there can be no accommodations,no space in a cottage; but this is all a mistake.
I was last month at my friend Elliott's, near Dartford.
Lady Elliott wished to give a dance.
'But how can itbe done?'
said she; 'my dear Ferrars, do tell me how itis to be managed.
There is not a room in this cottagethat will hold ten couple, and where can the supper be?'
I immediately saw that there could be no difficulty in it,so I said, 'My dear Lady Elliott, do not be uneasy.
The dining parlour will admit eighteen couple with ease;card-tables may be placed in the drawing-room; the librarymay be open for tea and other refreshments; and let thesupper be set out in the saloon.'
Lady Elliott was delightedwith the thought.
We measured the dining-room, and foundit would hold exactly eighteen couple, and the affairwas arranged precisely after my plan.
So that, in fact,you see, if people do but know how to set about it,every comfort may be as well enjoyed in a cottageas in the most spacious dwelling."
Elinor agreed to it all, for she did not thinkhe deserved the compliment of rational opposition.
As John Dashwood had no more pleasure in music than hiseldest sister, his mind was equally at liberty to fix onany thing else; and a thought struck him during the evening,which he communicated to his wife, for her approbation,when they got home.
The consideration of Mrs. Dennison'smistake,in supposing his sisters their guests, had suggested thepropriety of their being really invited to become such,while Mrs. Jenning's engagements kept her from home.
The expense would be nothing, the inconvenience not more;and it was altogether an attention which the delicacyof his conscience pointed out to be requisite to itscomplete enfranchisement from his promise to his father.
Fanny was startled at the proposal.
"I do not see how it can be done," said she,"without affronting Lady Middleton, for they spend every daywith her; otherwise I should be exceedingly glad to do it.
You know I am always ready to pay them any attentionin my power, as my taking them out this evening shews.
But they are Lady Middleton's visitors.
How can I ask themaway from her?"
Her husband, but with great humility, did not seethe force of her objection.
"They had already spent a weekin this manner in Conduit Street, and Lady Middletoncould not be displeased at their giving the same numberof days to such near relations."
Fanny paused a moment, and then, with fresh vigor, said,"My love I would ask them with all my heart, if itwas in my power.
But I had just settled within myselfto ask the Miss Steeles to spend a few days with us.
They are very well behaved, good kind of girls; and I thinkthe attention is due to them, as their uncle did so verywell by Edward.
We can ask your sisters some other year,you know; but the Miss Steeles may not be in town any more.
I am sure you will like them; indeed, you DO like them,you know, very much already, and so does my mother; and theyare such favourites with Harry!"
Mr. Dashwood was convinced.
He saw the necessityof inviting the Miss Steeles immediately, and his consciencewas pacified by the resolution of inviting his sistersanother year; at the same time, however, slyly suspectingthat another year would make the invitation needless,by bringing Elinor to town as Colonel Brandon's wife,and Marianne as THEIR visitor.
Fanny, rejoicing in her escape, and proud of the readywit that had procured it, wrote the next morning to Lucy,to request her company and her sister's, for some days,in Harley Street, as soon as Lady Middleton could spare them.
This was enough to make Lucy really and reasonably happy.
Mrs. Dashwood seemed actually working for her, herself;cherishing all her hopes, and promoting all her views!
Such an opportunity of being with Edward and his family was,above all things, the most material to her interest,and such an invitation the most gratifying to herfeelings!
It was an advantage that could not be toogratefully acknowledged, nor too speedily made use of;and the visit to Lady Middleton, which had not before hadany precise limits, was instantly discovered to have beenalways meant to end in two days' time.
When the note was shown to Elinor, as it was within tenminutes after its arrival, it gave her, for the first time,some share in the expectations of Lucy; for such a markof uncommon kindness, vouchsafed on so short an acquaintance,seemed to declare that the good-will towards her arosefrom something more than merely malice against herself;and might be brought, by time and address, to doevery thing that Lucy wished.
Her flattery had alreadysubdued the pride of Lady Middleton, and made an entryinto the close heart of Mrs. John Dashwood; and thesewere effects that laid open the probability of greater.
The Miss Steeles removed to Harley Street, and allthat reached Elinor of their influence there, strengthenedher expectation of the event.
Sir John, who called onthem more than once, brought home such accounts of thefavour they were in, as must be universally striking.
Mrs. Dashwood had never been so much pleased with anyyoung women in her life, as she was with them; had giveneach of them a needle book made by some emigrant;called Lucy by her Christian name; and did not knowwhether she should ever be able to part with them.
[At this point in the first and second edtions, Volume II ended.]
CHAPTER 37Mrs. Palmer was so well at the end of a fortnight,that her mother felt it no longer necessary to give upthe whole of her time to her; and, contenting herself withvisiting her once or twice a day, returned from that periodto her own home, and her own habits, in which she foundthe Miss Dashwoods very ready to resume their former share.
About the third or fourth morning after theirbeing thus resettled in Berkeley Street, Mrs. Jennings,on returning from her ordinary visit to Mrs. Palmer,entered the drawing-room, where Elinor was sittingby herself, with an air of such hurrying importanceas prepared her to hear something wonderful; and giving hertime only to form that idea, began directly to justify it,by saying,"Lord!
my dear Miss Dashwood!
have you heard the news?"
"No, ma'am.
What is it?"
"Something so strange!
But you shall hear it all.--When I got to Mr. Palmer's, I found Charlotte quitein a fuss about the child.
She was sure it was veryill--it cried, and fretted, and was all over pimples.
So I looked at it directly, and, 'Lord!
my dear,'says I, 'it is nothing in the world, but the red gum--'and nurse said just the same.
But Charlotte, she wouldnot be satisfied, so Mr. Donavan was sent for; and luckilyhe happened to just come in from Harley Street, so hestepped over directly, and as soon as ever he saw the child,be said just as we did, that it was nothing in the worldbut the red gum, and then Charlotte was easy.
And so,just as he was going away again, it came into my head,I am sure I do not know how I happened to think of it,but it came into my head to ask him if there was any news.
So upon that, he smirked, and simpered, and looked grave,and seemed to know something or other, and at last hesaid in a whisper, 'For fear any unpleasant reportshould reach the young ladies under your care as to theirsister's indisposition, I think it advisable to say,that I believe there is no great reason for alarm; I hopeMrs. Dashwood will do very well.'"
"What!
is Fanny ill?"
"That is exactly what I said, my dear.
'Lord!'
says I,'is Mrs. Dashwood ill?'
So then it all came out; and thelong and the short of the matter, by all I can learn,seems to be this.
Mr. Edward Ferrars, the very youngman I used to joke with you about (but however, as itturns out, I am monstrous glad there was never any thingin it), Mr. Edward Ferrars, it seems, has been engagedabove this twelvemonth to my cousin Lucy!--There's for you,my dear!--And not a creature knowing a syllable of the matter,except Nancy!--Could you have believed such a thing possible?--There is no great wonder in their liking one another;but that matters should be brought so forward between them,and nobody suspect it!--THAT is strange!--I never happenedto see them together, or I am sure I should have found itout directly.
Well, and so this was kept a great secret,for fear of Mrs. Ferrars, and neither she nor yourbrother or sister suspected a word of the matter;--till this very morning, poor Nancy, who, you know, is awell-meaning creature, but no conjurer, popt it all out.
'Lord!'
thinks she to herself, 'they are all so fondof Lucy, to be sure they will make no difficulty about it;'and so, away she went to your sister, who was sitting allalone at her carpet-work, little suspecting what was tocome--for she had just been saying to your brother, only fiveminutes before, that she thought to make a match betweenEdward and some Lord's daughter or other, I forget who.
So you may think what a blow it was to all her vanityand pride.
She fell into violent hysterics immediately,with such screams as reached your brother's ears,as he was sitting in his own dressing-room down stairs,thinking about writing a letter to his steward in the country.
So up he flew directly, and a terrible scene took place,for Lucy was come to them by that time, little dreamingwhat was going on.
Poor soul!
I pity HER.
And I must say,I think she was used very hardly; for your sister scoldedlike any fury, and soon drove her into a fainting fit.
Nancy, she fell upon her knees, and cried bitterly;and your brother, he walked about the room, and saidhe did not know what to do.
Mrs. Dashwood declaredthey should not stay a minute longer in the house,and your brother was forced to go down upon HIS knees too,to persuade her to let them stay till they had packedup their clothes.
THEN she fell into hysterics again,and he was so frightened that he would send for Mr. Donavan,and Mr. Donavan found the house in all this uproar.
The carriage was at the door ready to take my poorcousins away, and they were just stepping in as hecame off; poor Lucy in such a condition, he says,she could hardly walk; and Nancy, she was almost as bad.
I declare, I have no patience with your sister; and I hope,with all my heart, it will be a match in spite of her.
Lord!
what a taking poor Mr. Edward will be in when hehears of it!
To have his love used so scornfully!
forthey say he is monstrous fond of her, as well he may.
I should not wonder, if he was to be in the greatestpassion!--and Mr. Donavan thinks just the same.
He and Ihad a great deal of talk about it; and the best of all is,that he is gone back again to Harley Street, that he maybe within call when Mrs. Ferrars is told of it, for shewas sent for as soon as ever my cousins left the house,for your sister was sure SHE would be in hysterics too;and so she may, for what I care.
I have no pity foreither of them.
I have no notion of people's makingsuch a to-do about money and greatness.
There is noreason on earth why Mr. Edward and Lucy should not marry;for I am sure Mrs. Ferrars may afford to do very wellby her son, and though Lucy has next to nothing herself,she knows better than any body how to make the mostof every thing; I dare say, if Mrs. Ferrars would onlyallow him five hundred a-year, she would make as goodan appearance with it as any body else would with eight.
Lord!
how snug they might live in such another cottageas yours--or a little bigger--with two maids, and two men;and I believe I could help them to a housemaid, for myBetty has a sister out of place, that would fit themexactly."
Here Mrs. Jennings ceased, and as Elinor had hadtime enough to collect her thoughts, she was ableto give such an answer, and make such observations,as the subject might naturally be supposed to produce.
Happy to find that she was not suspected of any extraordinaryinterest in it; that Mrs. Jennings (as she had of lateoften hoped might be the case) had ceased to imagine herat all attached to Edward; and happy above all the rest,in the absence of Marianne, she felt very well ableto speak of the affair without embarrassment, and togive her judgment, as she believed, with impartialityon the conduct of every one concerned in it.
She could hardly determine what her own expectationof its event really was; though she earnestly triedto drive away the notion of its being possible to endotherwise at last, than in the marriage of Edward and Lucy.
What Mrs. Ferrars would say and do, though there couldnot be a doubt of its nature, she was anxious to hear;and still more anxious to know how Edward wouldconduct himself.
For HIM she felt much compassion;--for Lucy very little--and it cost her some pains to procurethat little;--for the rest of the party none at all.
As Mrs. Jennings could talk on no other subject,Elinor soon saw the necessity of preparing Marianne forits discussion.
No time was to be lost in undeceiving her,in making her acquainted with the real truth, and inendeavouring to bring her to hear it talked of by others,without betraying that she felt any uneasiness for her sister,or any resentment against Edward.
Elinor's office was a painful one.--She was goingto remove what she really believed to be her sister'schief consolation,--to give such particulars of Edward as shefeared would ruin him for ever in her good opinion,-andto make Marianne, by a resemblance in their situations,which to HER fancy would seem strong, feel all her owndisappointment over again.
But unwelcome as such a taskmust be, it was necessary to be done, and Elinor thereforehastened to perform it.
She was very far from wishing to dwell on her ownfeelings, or to represent herself as suffering much,any otherwise than as the self-command she had practisedsince her first knowledge of Edward's engagement, mightsuggest a hint of what was practicable to Marianne.
Her narration was clear and simple; and though it couldnot be given without emotion, it was not accompaniedby violent agitation, nor impetuous grief.--THAT belongedrather to the hearer, for Marianne listened with horror,and cried excessively.
Elinor was to be the comforterof others in her own distresses, no less than in theirs;and all the comfort that could be given by assurancesof her own composure of mind, and a very earnestvindication of Edward from every charge but of imprudence,was readily offered.
But Marianne for some time would give credit to neither.
Edward seemed a second Willoughby; and acknowledgingas Elinor did, that she HAD loved him most sincerely,could she feel less than herself!
As for Lucy Steele,she considered her so totally unamiable, so absolutelyincapable of attaching a sensible man, that she couldnot be persuaded at first to believe, and afterwardsto pardon, any former affection of Edward for her.
She would not even admit it to have been natural;and Elinor left her to be convinced that it was so,by that which only could convince her, a better knowledgeof mankind.
Her first communication had reached no farther thanto state the fact of the engagement, and the length of timeit had existed.--Marianne's feelings had then broken in,and put an end to all regularity of detail; and for sometime all that could be done was to soothe her distress,lessen her alarms, and combat her resentment.
The firstquestion on her side, which led to farther particulars,was,"How long has this been known to you, Elinor?
hashe written to you?"
"I have known it these four months.
When Lucyfirst came to Barton Park last November, she told mein confidence of her engagement."
At these words, Marianne's eyes expressed the astonishmentwhich her lips could not utter.
After a pause of wonder,she exclaimed--"Four months!--Have you known of this four months?"
Elinor confirmed it.
"What!--while attending me in all my misery, has thisbeen on your heart?--And I have reproached you for beinghappy!"
--"It was not fit that you should then know how muchI was the reverse!"
"Four months!"
--cried Marianne again.--"So calm!--so cheerful!--how have you been supported?"
--"By feeling that I was doing my duty.--My promise toLucy, obliged me to be secret.
I owed it to her, therefore,to avoid giving any hint of the truth; and I owed it to myfamily and friends, not to create in them a solicitude about me,which it could not be in my power to satisfy."
Marianne seemed much struck.
"I have very often wished to undeceive yourself and mymother," added Elinor; "and once or twice I have attempted it;--but without betraying my trust, I never could have convincedyou."
"Four months!--and yet you loved him!"
--"Yes.
But I did not love only him;--and while the comfortof others was dear to me, I was glad to spare them from knowinghow much I felt.
Now, I can think and speak of it withlittle emotion.
I would not have you suffer on my account;for I assure you I no longer suffer materially myself.
I have many things to support me.
I am not conscious of havingprovoked the disappointment by any imprudence of my own,I have borne it as much as possible without spreadingit farther.
I acquit Edward of essential misconduct.
I wish him very happy; and I am so sure of his alwaysdoing his duty, that though now he may harbour some regret,in the end he must become so.
Lucy does not want sense,and that is the foundation on which every thing good maybe built.--And after all, Marianne, after all that isbewitching in the idea of a single and constant attachment,and all that can be said of one's happiness dependingentirely on any particular person, it is not meant--itis not fit--it is not possible that it should be so.--Edward will marry Lucy; he will marry a woman superiorin person and understanding to half her sex; and timeand habit will teach him to forget that he ever thoughtanother superior to HER."
--"If such is your way of thinking," said Marianne,"if the loss of what is most valued is so easilyto be made up by something else, your resolution,your self-command, are, perhaps, a little less to bewondered at.--They are brought more within my comprehension."
"I understand you.--You do not suppose that I have everfelt much.--For four months, Marianne, I have had all thishanging on my mind, without being at liberty to speakof it to a single creature; knowing that it would makeyou and my mother most unhappy whenever it were explainedto you, yet unable to prepare you for it in the least.--It was told me,--it was in a manner forced on me by thevery person herself, whose prior engagement ruined allmy prospects; and told me, as I thought, with triumph.--This person's suspicions, therefore, I have had to oppose,by endeavouring to appear indifferent where I have been mostdeeply interested;--and it has not been only once;--I havehad her hopes and exultation to listen to again and again.--I have known myself to be divided from Edward for ever,without hearing one circumstance that could make me lessdesire the connection.--Nothing has proved him unworthy;nor has anything declared him indifferent to me.--I have had to contend against the unkindness of his sister,and the insolence of his mother; and have suffered thepunishment of an attachment, without enjoying its advantages.--And all this has been going on at a time, when, as youknow too well, it has not been my only unhappiness.--If you can think me capable of ever feeling--surely youmay suppose that I have suffered NOW.
The composureof mind with which I have brought myself at presentto consider the matter, the consolation that I have beenwilling to admit, have been the effect of constant andpainful exertion;--they did not spring up of themselves;--they did not occur to relieve my spirits at first.--No, Marianne.--THEN, if I had not been bound to silence,perhaps nothing could have kept me entirely--not even what Iowed to my dearest friends--from openly shewing that I wasVERY unhappy."
--Marianne was quite subdued.--"Oh!
Elinor," she cried, "you have made me hatemyself for ever.--How barbarous have I been to you!--you, who have been my only comfort, who have borne with mein all my misery, who have seemed to be only sufferingfor me!--Is this my gratitude?--Is this the only return Ican make you?--Because your merit cries out upon myself,I have been trying to do it away."
The tenderest caresses followed this confession.
In such a frame of mind as she was now in, Elinor hadno difficulty in obtaining from her whatever promiseshe required; and at her request, Marianne engagednever to speak of the affair to any one with the leastappearance of bitterness;--to meet Lucy without betrayingthe smallest increase of dislike to her;--and even to seeEdward himself, if chance should bring them together,without any diminution of her usual cordiality.--These were great concessions;--but where Marianne feltthat she had injured, no reparation could be too muchfor her to make.
She performed her promise of being discreet,to admiration.--She attended to all that Mrs. Jenningshad to say upon the subject, with an unchanging complexion,dissented from her in nothing, and was heard threetimes to say, "Yes, ma'am."
--She listened to her praiseof Lucy with only moving from one chair to another,and when Mrs. Jennings talked of Edward's affection,it cost her only a spasm in her throat.--Such advancestowards heroism in her sister, made Elinor feel equalto any thing herself.
The next morning brought a farther trial of it,in a visit from their brother, who came with a most seriousaspect to talk over the dreadful affair, and bring themnews of his wife.
"You have heard, I suppose," said he with great solemnity,as soon as he was seated, "of the very shocking discoverythat took place under our roof yesterday."
They all looked their assent; it seemed too awfula moment for speech.
"Your sister," he continued, "has suffered dreadfully.
Mrs. Ferrars too--in short it has been a scene of suchcomplicated distress--but I will hope that the storm maybe weathered without our being any of us quite overcome.
Poor Fanny!
she was in hysterics all yesterday.
But I would not alarm you too much.
Donavan says thereis nothing materially to be apprehended; her constitutionis a good one, and her resolution equal to any thing.
She has borne it all, with the fortitude of an angel!
She says she never shall think well of anybody again;and one cannot wonder at it, after being so deceived!--meeting with such ingratitude, where so much kindnesshad been shewn, so much confidence had been placed!
Itwas quite out of the benevolence of her heart, that shehad asked these young women to her house; merely becauseshe thought they deserved some attention, were harmless,well-behaved girls, and would be pleasant companions;for otherwise we both wished very much to have invited youand Marianne to be with us, while your kind friend there,was attending her daughter.
And now to be so rewarded!
'I wish, with all my heart,' says poor Fanny in heraffectionate way, 'that we had asked your sisters insteadof them.'"
Here he stopped to be thanked; which being done,he went on.
"What poor Mrs. Ferrars suffered, when first Fannybroke it to her, is not to be described.
While she withthe truest affection had been planning a most eligibleconnection for him, was it to be supposed that he couldbe all the time secretly engaged to another person!--sucha suspicion could never have entered her head!
If shesuspected ANY prepossession elsewhere, it could not bein THAT quarter.
'THERE, to be sure,' said she, 'I mighthave thought myself safe.'
She was quite in an agony.
We consulted together, however, as to what should be done,and at last she determined to send for Edward.
He came.
But I am sorry to relate what ensued.
All that Mrs. Ferrars could say to make him put an endto the engagement, assisted too as you may well supposeby my arguments, and Fanny's entreaties, was ofno avail.
Duty, affection, every thing was disregarded.
I never thought Edward so stubborn, so unfeeling before.
His mother explained to him her liberal designs, in caseof his marrying Miss Morton; told him she would settle onhim the Norfolk estate, which, clear of land-tax, bringsin a good thousand a-year; offered even, when mattersgrew desperate, to make it twelve hundred; and in oppositionto this, if he still persisted in this low connection,represented to him the certain penury that must attendthe match.
His own two thousand pounds she protestedshould be his all; she would never see him again; and so farwould she be from affording him the smallest assistance,that if he were to enter into any profession with a viewof better support, she would do all in her power to preventhim advancing in it."
Here Marianne, in an ecstasy of indignation,clapped her hands together, and cried, "Gracious God!
can this be possible!"
"Well may you wonder, Marianne," replied her brother,"at the obstinacy which could resist such arguments as these.
Your exclamation is very natural."
Marianne was going to retort, but she rememberedher promises, and forbore.
"All this, however," he continued, "was urged in vain.
Edward said very little; but what he did say, was inthe most determined manner.
Nothing should prevail onhim to give up his engagement.
He would stand to it,cost him what it might."
"Then," cried Mrs. Jennings with blunt sincerity,no longer able to be silent, "he has acted like an honestman!
I beg your pardon, Mr. Dashwood, but if he haddone otherwise, I should have thought him a rascal.
I have some little concern in the business, as wellas yourself, for Lucy Steele is my cousin, and I believethere is not a better kind of girl in the world, nor onewho more deserves a good husband."
John Dashwood was greatly astonished; but his naturewas calm, not open to provocation, and he never wishedto offend anybody, especially anybody of good fortune.
He therefore replied, without any resentment,"I would by no means speak disrespectfully of anyrelation of yours, madam.
Miss Lucy Steele is, I dare say,a very deserving young woman, but in the present caseyou know, the connection must be impossible.
And to have entered into a secret engagement with ayoung man under her uncle's care, the son of a womanespecially of such very large fortune as Mrs. Ferrars,is perhaps, altogether a little extraordinary.
In short,I do not mean to reflect upon the behaviour of any personwhom you have a regard for, Mrs. Jennings.
We all wishher extremely happy; and Mrs. Ferrars's conduct throughoutthe whole, has been such as every conscientious, good mother,in like circumstances, would adopt.
It has been dignifiedand liberal.
Edward has drawn his own lot, and I fearit will be a bad one."
Marianne sighed out her similar apprehension;and Elinor's heart wrung for the feelings of Edward,while braving his mother's threats, for a woman who couldnot reward him.
"Well, sir," said Mrs. Jennings, "and how did it end?"
"I am sorry to say, ma'am, in a most unhappy rupture:--Edward is dismissed for ever from his mother's notice.
He left her house yesterday, but where he is gone, or whetherhe is still in town, I do not know; for WE of course canmake no inquiry."
"Poor young man!--and what is to become of him?"
"What, indeed, ma'am!
It is a melancholy consideration.
Born to the prospect of such affluence!
I cannot conceivea situation more deplorable.
The interest of two thousandpounds--how can a man live on it?--and when to that is addedthe recollection, that he might, but for his own folly,within three months have been in the receipt of twothousand, five hundred a-year (for Miss Morton hasthirty thousand pounds,) I cannot picture to myselfa more wretched condition.
We must all feel for him;and the more so, because it is totally out of our powerto assist him."
"Poor young man!"
cried Mrs. Jennings, "I am surehe should be very welcome to bed and board at my house;and so I would tell him if I could see him.
It is not fitthat he should be living about at his own charge now,at lodgings and taverns."
Elinor's heart thanked her for such kindness towards Edward,though she could not forbear smiling at the form of it.
"If he would only have done as well by himself,"said John Dashwood, "as all his friends were disposed to doby him, he might now have been in his proper situation,and would have wanted for nothing.
But as it is, it mustbe out of anybody's power to assist him.
And there is onething more preparing against him, which must be worse thanall--his mother has determined, with a very natural kindof spirit, to settle THAT estate upon Robert immediately,which might have been Edward's, on proper conditions.
I left her this morning with her lawyer, talking overthe business."
"Well!"
said Mrs. Jennings, "that is HER revenge.
Everybody has a way of their own.
But I don't think minewould be, to make one son independent, because another hadplagued me."
Marianne got up and walked about the room.
"Can anything be more galling to the spirit of a man,"continued John, "than to see his younger brother inpossession of an estate which might have been his own?
Poor Edward!
I feel for him sincerely."
A few minutes more spent in the same kind of effusion,concluded his visit; and with repeated assurances to hissisters that he really believed there was no materialdanger in Fanny's indisposition, and that they neednot therefore be very uneasy about it, he went away;leaving the three ladies unanimous in their sentimentson the present occasion, as far at least as it regardedMrs. Ferrars's conduct, the Dashwoods', and Edward's.
Marianne's indignation burst forth as soon as hequitted the room; and as her vehemence made reserveimpossible in Elinor, and unnecessary in Mrs. Jennings,they all joined in a very spirited critique upon the party.
CHAPTER 38Mrs. Jennings was very warm in her praise of Edward'sconduct, but only Elinor and Marianne understood itstrue merit.
THEY only knew how little he had had to tempthim to be disobedient, and how small was the consolation,beyond the consciousness of doing right, that couldremain to him in the loss of friends and fortune.
Elinor gloried in his integrity; and Marianne forgave allhis offences in compassion for his punishment.
But thoughconfidence between them was, by this public discovery,restored to its proper state, it was not a subject onwhich either of them were fond of dwelling when alone.
Elinor avoided it upon principle, as tending to fix stillmore upon her thoughts, by the too warm, too positiveassurances of Marianne, that belief of Edward's continuedaffection for herself which she rather wished to do away;and Marianne's courage soon failed her, in tryingto converse upon a topic which always left her moredissatisfied with herself than ever, by the comparisonit necessarily produced between Elinor's conduct and her own.
She felt all the force of that comparison; but notas her sister had hoped, to urge her to exertion now;she felt it with all the pain of continual self-reproach,regretted most bitterly that she had never exertedherself before; but it brought only the torture of penitence,without the hope of amendment.
Her mind was so much weakenedthat she still fancied present exertion impossible,and therefore it only dispirited her more.
Nothing new was heard by them, for a day or two afterwards,of affairs in Harley Street, or Bartlett's Buildings.
But though so much of the matter was known to them already,that Mrs. Jennings might have had enough to do in spreadingthat knowledge farther, without seeking after more,she had resolved from the first to pay a visit of comfortand inquiry to her cousins as soon as she could;and nothing but the hindrance of more visitors than usual,had prevented her going to them within that time.
The third day succeeding their knowledge of theparticulars, was so fine, so beautiful a Sunday as to drawmany to Kensington Gardens, though it was only the secondweek in March.
Mrs. Jennings and Elinor were of the number;but Marianne, who knew that the Willoughbys were againin town, and had a constant dread of meeting them,chose rather to stay at home, than venture into so publica place.
An intimate acquaintance of Mrs. Jennings joinedthem soon after they entered the Gardens, and Elinor wasnot sorry that by her continuing with them, and engagingall Mrs. Jennings's conversation, she was herself leftto quiet reflection.
She saw nothing of the Willoughbys,nothing of Edward, and for some time nothing of anybodywho could by any chance whether grave or gay, be interestingto her.
But at last she found herself with some surprise,accosted by Miss Steele, who, though looking rather shy,expressed great satisfaction in meeting them, and on receivingencouragement from the particular kindness of Mrs. Jennings,left her own party for a short time, to join their's.
Mrs. Jennings immediately whispered to Elinor,"Get it all out of her, my dear.
She will tell youany thing if you ask.
You see I cannot leave Mrs.
Clarke."
It was lucky, however, for Mrs. Jennings's curiosityand Elinor's too, that she would tell any thing WITHOUTbeing asked; for nothing would otherwise have been learnt.
"I am so glad to meet you;" said Miss Steele,taking her familiarly by the arm--"for I wanted to see youof all things in the world."
And then lowering her voice,"I suppose Mrs. Jennings has heard all about it.
Is she angry?"
"Not at all, I believe, with you."
"That is a good thing.
And Lady Middleton, is SHE angry?"
"I cannot suppose it possible that she should."
"I am monstrous glad of it.
Good gracious!
I havehad such a time of it!
I never saw Lucy in such a ragein my life.
She vowed at first she would never trim meup a new bonnet, nor do any thing else for me again,so long as she lived; but now she is quite come to,and we are as good friends as ever.
Look, she made methis bow to my hat, and put in the feather last night.
There now, YOU are going to laugh at me too.
But whyshould not I wear pink ribbons?
I do not care if it ISthe Doctor's favourite colour.
I am sure, for my part,I should never have known he DID like it better thanany other colour, if he had not happened to say so.
My cousins have been so plaguing me!
I declare sometimesI do not know which way to look before them."
She had wandered away to a subject on which Elinorhad nothing to say, and therefore soon judged it expedientto find her way back again to the first.
"Well, but Miss Dashwood," speaking triumphantly,"people may say what they chuse about Mr. Ferrars'sdeclaring he would not have Lucy, for it is no such thingI can tell you; and it is quite a shame for such ill-naturedreports to be spread abroad.
Whatever Lucy might thinkabout it herself, you know, it was no business of otherpeople to set it down for certain."
"I never heard any thing of the kind hinted at before,I assure you," said Elinor.
"Oh, did not you?
But it WAS said, I know, very well,and by more than one; for Miss Godby told Miss Sparks,that nobody in their senses could expect Mr. Ferrarsto give up a woman like Miss Morton, with thirty thousandpounds to her fortune, for Lucy Steele that hadnothing at all; and I had it from Miss Sparks myself.
And besides that, my cousin Richard said himself,that when it came to the point he was afraid Mr. Ferrarswould be off; and when Edward did not come near usfor three days, I could not tell what to think myself;and I believe in my heart Lucy gave it up all for lost;for we came away from your brother's Wednesday,and we saw nothing of him not all Thursday, Friday,and Saturday, and did not know what was become of him.
Once Lucy thought to write to him, but then her spiritsrose against that.
However this morning he came justas we came home from church; and then it all came out,how he had been sent for Wednesday to Harley Street,and been talked to by his mother and all of them,and how he had declared before them all that he lovednobody but Lucy, and nobody but Lucy would he have.
And how he had been so worried by what passed,that as soon as he had went away from his mother's house,he had got upon his horse, and rid into the country,some where or other; and how he had stayed about at an innall Thursday and Friday, on purpose to get the betterof it.
And after thinking it all over and over again,he said, it seemed to him as if, now he had no fortune,and no nothing at all, it would be quite unkind to keepher on to the engagement, because it must be for her loss,for he had nothing but two thousand pounds, and no hopeof any thing else; and if he was to go into orders,as he had some thoughts, he could get nothing but a curacy,and how was they to live upon that?--He could not bearto think of her doing no better, and so he begged,if she had the least mind for it, to put an end to thematter directly, and leave him shift for himself.
I heard him say all this as plain as could possibly be.
And it was entirely for HER sake, and upon HER account,that he said a word about being off, and not upon his own.
I will take my oath he never dropt a syllable of beingtired of her, or of wishing to marry Miss Morton, or anything like it.
But, to be sure, Lucy would not giveear to such kind of talking; so she told him directly(with a great deal about sweet and love, you know,and all that--Oh, la!
one can't repeat such kind of thingsyou know)--she told him directly, she had not the leastmind in the world to be off, for she could live with himupon a trifle, and how little so ever he might have,she should be very glad to have it all, you know,or something of the kind.
So then he was monstrous happy,and talked on some time about what they should do,and they agreed he should take orders directly,and they must wait to be married till he got a living.
And just then I could not hear any more, for my cousincalled from below to tell me Mrs. Richardson was come inher coach, and would take one of us to Kensington Gardens;so I was forced to go into the room and interrupt them,to ask Lucy if she would like to go, but she did notcare to leave Edward; so I just run up stairs and puton a pair of silk stockings and came off with the Richardsons."
"I do not understand what you mean by interrupting them,"said Elinor; "you were all in the same room together,were not you?"
"No, indeed, not us.
La!
Miss Dashwood, do youthink people make love when any body else is by?
Oh,for shame!--To be sure you must know better than that.
(Laughing affectedly.)
--No, no; they were shut up in thedrawing-room together, and all I heard was only by listeningat the door."
"How!"
cried Elinor; "have you been repeating to mewhat you only learnt yourself by listening at the door?
I am sorry I did not know it before; for I certainlywould not have suffered you to give me particulars of aconversation which you ought not to have known yourself.
How could you behave so unfairly by your sister?"
"Oh, la!
there is nothing in THAT.
I only stood atthe door, and heard what I could.
And I am sure Lucy wouldhave done just the same by me; for a year or two back,when Martha Sharpe and I had so many secrets together,she never made any bones of hiding in a closet, or behinda chimney-board, on purpose to hear what we said."
Elinor tried to talk of something else; but MissSteele could not be kept beyond a couple of minutes,from what was uppermost in her mind.
"Edward talks of going to Oxford soon," said she;"but now he is lodging at No.
--, Pall Mall.
What anill-natured woman his mother is, an't she?
And yourbrother and sister were not very kind!
However,I shan't say anything against them to YOU; and to be surethey did send us home in their own chariot, whichwas more than I looked for.
And for my part, I was allin a fright for fear your sister should ask us for thehuswifes she had gave us a day or two before; but, however,nothing was said about them, and I took care to keep mineout of sight.
Edward have got some business at Oxford,he says; so he must go there for a time; and after THAT,as soon as he can light upon a Bishop, he will be ordained.
I wonder what curacy he will get!--Good gracious!
(giggling as she spoke) I'd lay my life I know whatmy cousins will say, when they hear of it.
They willtell me I should write to the Doctor, to get Edwardthe curacy of his new living.
I know they will; but I amsure I would not do such a thing for all the world.--'La!'
I shall say directly, 'I wonder how you could thinkof such a thing?
I write to the Doctor, indeed!'"
"Well," said Elinor, "it is a comfort to be preparedagainst the worst.
You have got your answer ready."
Miss Steele was going to reply on the same subject,but the approach of her own party made another more necessary.
"Oh, la!
here come the Richardsons.
I had a vast dealmore to say to you, but I must not stay away from them notany longer.
I assure you they are very genteel people.
He makes a monstrous deal of money, and they keep theirown coach.
I have not time to speak to Mrs. Jennings aboutit myself, but pray tell her I am quite happy to hear sheis not in anger against us, and Lady Middleton the same;and if anything should happen to take you and yoursister away, and Mrs. Jennings should want company,I am sure we should be very glad to come and stay with herfor as long a time as she likes.
I suppose Lady Middletonwon't ask us any more this bout.
Good-by; I am sorryMiss Marianne was not here.
Remember me kindly to her.
La!
if you have not got your spotted muslin on!--I wonderyou was not afraid of its being torn."
Such was her parting concern; for after this, she hadtime only to pay her farewell compliments to Mrs. Jennings,before her company was claimed by Mrs. Richardson;and Elinor was left in possession of knowledge whichmight feed her powers of reflection some time, though shehad learnt very little more than what had been alreadyforeseen and foreplanned in her own mind.
Edward's marriagewith Lucy was as firmly determined on, and the timeof its taking place remained as absolutely uncertain,as she had concluded it would be;--every thing depended,exactly after her expectation, on his getting that preferment,of which, at present, there seemed not the smallest chance.
As soon as they returned to the carriage,Mrs. Jennings was eager for information; but as Elinorwished to spread as little as possible intelligencethat had in the first place been so unfairly obtained,she confined herself to the brief repetition of suchsimple particulars, as she felt assured that Lucy,for the sake of her own consequence, would chooseto have known.
The continuance of their engagement,and the means that were able to be taken for promotingits end, was all her communication; and this producedfrom Mrs. Jennings the following natural remark.
"Wait for his having a living!--ay, we all know howTHAT will end:--they will wait a twelvemonth, and findingno good comes of it, will set down upon a curacy of fiftypounds a-year, with the interest of his two thousand pounds,and what little matter Mr. Steele and Mr. Pratt cangive her.--Then they will have a child every year!
andLord help 'em!
how poor they will be!--I must seewhat I can give them towards furnishing their house.
Two maids and two men, indeed!--as I talked of t'otherday.--No, no, they must get a stout girl of all works.--Betty's sister would never do for them NOW."
The next morning brought Elinor a letter by thetwo-penny post from Lucy herself.
It was as follows:                    "Bartlett's Building, March.
"I hope my dear Miss Dashwood will excuse the     liberty I take of writing to her; but I know your     friendship for me will make you pleased to hear such     a good account of myself and my dear Edward, after     all the troubles we have went through lately,     therefore will make no more apologies, but proceed     to say that, thank God!
though we have suffered     dreadfully, we are both quite well now, and as happy     as we must always be in one another's love.
We have     had great trials, and great persecutions, but     however, at the same time, gratefully acknowledge     many friends, yourself not the least among them,     whose great kindness I shall always thankfully     remember, as will Edward too, who I have told of     it.
I am sure you will be glad to hear, as likewise     dear Mrs. Jennings, I spent two happy hours with     him yesterday afternoon, he would not hear of our     parting, though earnestly did I, as I thought my     duty required, urge him to it for prudence sake,     and would have parted for ever on the spot, would     he consent to it; but he said it should never be,     he did not regard his mother's anger, while he could     have my affections; our prospects are not very     bright, to be sure, but we must wait, and hope for     the best; he will be ordained shortly; and should     it ever be in your power to recommend him to any     body that has a living to bestow, am very sure you     will not forget us, and dear Mrs. Jennings too,     trust she will speak a good word for us to Sir John,     or Mr. Palmer, or any friend that may be able to     assist us.--Poor Anne was much to blame for what     she did, but she did it for the best, so I say     nothing; hope Mrs. Jennings won't think it too much     trouble to give us a call, should she come this way     any morning, 'twould be a great kindness, and my     cousins would be proud to know her.--My paper reminds     me to conclude; and begging to be most gratefully     and respectfully remembered to her, and to Sir John,     and Lady Middleton, and the dear children, when you     chance to see them, and love to Miss Marianne,                                      "I am, &c."As soon as Elinor had finished it, she performedwhat she concluded to be its writer's real design,by placing it in the hands of Mrs. Jennings, who read italoud with many comments of satisfaction and praise.
"Very well indeed!--how prettily she writes!--aye,that was quite proper to let him be off if he would.
That was just like Lucy.--Poor soul!
I wish I COULD gethim a living, with all my heart.--She calls me dearMrs. Jennings, you see.
She is a good-hearted girlas ever lived.--Very well upon my word.
That sentenceis very prettily turned.
Yes, yes, I will go and see her,sure enough.
How attentive she is, to think of everybody!--Thank you, my dear, for shewing it me.
It isas pretty a letter as ever I saw, and does Lucy's headand heart great credit."
CHAPTER 39The Miss Dashwoods had now been rather more thantwo months in town, and Marianne's impatience to be goneincreased every day.
She sighed for the air, the liberty,the quiet of the country; and fancied that if any placecould give her ease, Barton must do it.
Elinor was hardlyless anxious than herself for their removal, and only so muchless bent on its being effected immediately, as that shewas conscious of the difficulties of so long a journey,which Marianne could not be brought to acknowledge.
She began, however, seriously to turn her thoughts towardsits accomplishment, and had already mentioned their wishesto their kind hostess, who resisted them with all theeloquence of her good-will, when a plan was suggested,which, though detaining them from home yet a few weekslonger, appeared to Elinor altogether much more eligiblethan any other.
The Palmers were to remove to Clevelandabout the end of March, for the Easter holidays;and Mrs. Jennings, with both her friends, received a verywarm invitation from Charlotte to go with them.
This wouldnot, in itself, have been sufficient for the delicacy ofMiss Dashwood;--but it was inforced with so much realpoliteness by Mr. Palmer himself, as, joined to the verygreat amendment of his manners towards them since hersister had been known to be unhappy, induced her to acceptit with pleasure.
When she told Marianne what she had done, however,her first reply was not very auspicious.
"Cleveland!"
--she cried, with great agitation.
"No, I cannot go to Cleveland."
--"You forget," said Elinor gently, "that its situationis not...that it is not in the neighbourhood of...""But it is in Somersetshire.--I cannot gointo Somersetshire.--There, where I looked forwardto going...No, Elinor, you cannot expect me to go there."
Elinor would not argue upon the propriety of overcomingsuch feelings;--she only endeavoured to counteract them byworking on others;--represented it, therefore, as a measurewhich would fix the time of her returning to that dear mother,whom she so much wished to see, in a more eligible,more comfortable manner, than any other plan could do,and perhaps without any greater delay.
From Cleveland,which was within a few miles of Bristol, the distance toBarton was not beyond one day, though a long day's journey;and their mother's servant might easily come there to attendthem down; and as there could be no occasion of theirstaying above a week at Cleveland, they might now be athome in little more than three weeks' time.
As Marianne'saffection for her mother was sincere, it must triumphwith little difficulty, over the imaginary evils she had started.
Mrs. Jennings was so far from being weary of her guest,that she pressed them very earnestly to return with her againfrom Cleveland.
Elinor was grateful for the attention,but it could not alter her design; and their mother'sconcurrence being readily gained, every thing relativeto their return was arranged as far as it could be;--and Marianne found some relief in drawing up a statementof the hours that were yet to divide her from Barton.
"Ah!
Colonel, I do not know what you and I shalldo without the Miss Dashwoods;"--was Mrs. Jennings'saddress to him when he first called on her, after theirleaving her was settled--"for they are quite resolvedupon going home from the Palmers;--and how forlorn weshall be, when I come back!--Lord!
we shall sit and gapeat one another as dull as two cats."
Perhaps Mrs. Jennings was in hopes, by this vigoroussketch of their future ennui, to provoke him to makethat offer, which might give himself an escape from it;--and if so, she had soon afterwards good reason to thinkher object gained; for, on Elinor's moving to the windowto take more expeditiously the dimensions of a print,which she was going to copy for her friend, he followedher to it with a look of particular meaning, and conversedwith her there for several minutes.
The effect of hisdiscourse on the lady too, could not escape her observation,for though she was too honorable to listen, and had evenchanged her seat, on purpose that she might NOT hear,to one close by the piano forte on which Mariannewas playing, she could not keep herself from seeingthat Elinor changed colour, attended with agitation,and was too intent on what he said to pursue her employment.--Still farther in confirmation of her hopes, in the intervalof Marianne's turning from one lesson to another,some words of the Colonel's inevitably reached her ear,in which he seemed to be apologising for the badnessof his house.
This set the matter beyond a doubt.
She wondered, indeed, at his thinking it necessaryto do so; but supposed it to be the proper etiquette.
What Elinor said in reply she could not distinguish,but judged from the motion of her lips, that she didnot think THAT any material objection;--and Mrs. Jenningscommended her in her heart for being so honest.
They then talked on for a few minutes longer without hercatching a syllable, when another lucky stop in Marianne'sperformance brought her these words in the Colonel's calm voice,--"I am afraid it cannot take place very soon."
Astonished and shocked at so unlover-like a speech,she was almost ready to cry out, "Lord!
what shouldhinder it?"
--but checking her desire, confined herselfto this silent ejaculation.
"This is very strange!--sure he need not wait to be older."
This delay on the Colonel's side, however, did notseem to offend or mortify his fair companion in the least,for on their breaking up the conference soon afterwards,and moving different ways, Mrs. Jennings very plainly heardElinor say, and with a voice which shewed her to feel what she said,"I shall always think myself very much obliged to you."
Mrs. Jennings was delighted with her gratitude,and only wondered that after hearing such a sentence,the Colonel should be able to take leave of them, as heimmediately did, with the utmost sang-froid, and go awaywithout making her any reply!--She had not thought her oldfriend could have made so indifferent a suitor.
What had really passed between them was to this effect.
"I have heard," said he, with great compassion,"of the injustice your friend Mr. Ferrars has sufferedfrom his family; for if I understand the matter right,he has been entirely cast off by them for perseveringin his engagement with a very deserving young woman.--Have I been rightly informed?--Is it so?--"Elinor told him that it was.
"The cruelty, the impolitic cruelty,"--he replied,with great feeling,--"of dividing, or attempting to divide,two young people long attached to each other, is terrible.--Mrs. Ferrars does not know what she may be doing--whatshe may drive her son to.
I have seen Mr. Ferrars twoor three times in Harley Street, and am much pleasedwith him.
He is not a young man with whom one canbe intimately acquainted in a short time, but I haveseen enough of him to wish him well for his own sake,and as a friend of yours, I wish it still more.
I understand that he intends to take orders.
Will yoube so good as to tell him that the living of Delaford,now just vacant, as I am informed by this day's post,is his, if he think it worth his acceptance--but THAT,perhaps, so unfortunately circumstanced as he is now,it may be  nonsense to appear to doubt; I only wish itwere more  valuable.-- It is a rectory, but a small one;the late incumbent, I believe, did not make more than200 L per annum, and though it is certainly capableof improvement, I fear, not to such an amount asto afford him a very comfortable income.
Such as it is,however, my pleasure in presenting him to it,will be very great.
Pray assure him of it."
Elinor's astonishment at this commission couldhardly have been greater, had the Colonel been reallymaking her an offer of his hand.
The preferment,which only two days before she had considered as hopelessfor Edward, was already provided to enable him to marry;--and SHE, of all people in the world, was fixed on tobestow it!--Her emotion was such as Mrs. Jennings hadattributed to a very different cause;--but whatever minorfeelings less pure, less pleasing, might have a sharein that emotion, her esteem for the general benevolence,and her gratitude for the particular friendship,which together prompted Colonel Brandon to this act,were strongly felt, and warmly expressed.
She thanked himfor it with all her heart, spoke of Edward's principles anddisposition with that praise which she knew them to deserve;and promised to undertake the commission with pleasure,if it were really his wish to put off so agreeable an officeto another.
But at the same time, she could not helpthinking that no one could so well perform it as himself.
It was an office in short, from which, unwilling to giveEdward the pain of receiving an obligation from HER,she would have been very glad to be spared herself;--but Colonel Brandon, on motives of equal delicacy,declining it likewise, still seemed so desirous of its beinggiven through her means, that she would not on any accountmake farther opposition.
Edward, she believed, was still intown,and fortunately she had heard his address from Miss Steele.
She could undertake therefore to inform him of it,in the course of the day.
After this had been settled,Colonel Brandon began to talk of his own advantagein securing so respectable and agreeable a neighbour,and THEN it was that he mentioned with regret, that thehouse was small and indifferent;--an evil which Elinor,as Mrs. Jennings had supposed her to do, made very light of,at least as far as regarded its size.
"The smallness of the house," said she,"I cannot imagine any inconvenience to them,for it will be in proportion to their family and income."
By which the Colonel was surprised to find that SHEwas considering Mr. Ferrars's marriage as the certainconsequence of the presentation; for he did not suppose itpossible that Delaford living could supply such an income,as anybody in his style of life would venture to settle on--and he said so.
"This little rectory CAN do no more than make Mr. Ferrarscomfortable as a bachelor; it cannot enable him to marry.
I am sorry to say that my patronage ends with this;and my interest is hardly more extensive.
If, however,by an unforeseen chance it should be in my power to servehim farther, I must think very differently of himfrom what I now do, if I am not as ready to be usefulto him then as I sincerely wish I could be at present.
What I am now doing indeed, seems nothing at all,since it can advance him so little towards what mustbe his principal, his only object of happiness.
His marriage must still be a distant good;--at least,I am afraid it cannot take place very soon.--"Such was the sentence which, when misunderstood,so justly offended the delicate feelings of Mrs. Jennings;but after this narration of what really passed betweenColonel Brandon and Elinor, while they stood at the window,the gratitude expressed by the latter on their parting, mayperhaps appear in general, not less reasonably excited,nor less properly worded than if it had arisen froman offer of marriage.
CHAPTER 40"Well, Miss Dashwood," said Mrs. Jennings,sagaciously smiling, as soon as the gentleman had withdrawn,"I do not ask you what the Colonel has been saying to you;for though, upon my honour, I TRIED to keep out of hearing,I could not help catching enough to understand his business.
And I assure you I never was better pleased in my life,and I wish you joy of it with all my heart."
"Thank you, ma'am," said Elinor.
"It is a matterof great joy to me; and I feel the goodness of ColonelBrandon most sensibly.
There are not many men who wouldact as he has done.
Few people who have so compassionatea heart!
I never was more astonished in my life."
"Lord!
my dear, you are very modest.
I an't the leastastonished at it in the world, for I have often thoughtof late, there was nothing more likely to happen."
"You judged from your knowledge of the Colonel'sgeneral benevolence; but at least you could not foreseethat the opportunity would so very soon occur."
"Opportunity!"
repeated Mrs. Jennings--"Oh!
as to that,when a man has once made up his mind to such a thing,somehow or other he will soon find an opportunity.
Well, my dear, I wish you joy of it again and again;and if ever there was a happy couple in the world, I thinkI shall soon know where to look for them."
"You mean to go to Delaford after them I suppose,"said Elinor, with a faint smile.
"Aye, my dear, that I do, indeed.
And as to the housebeing a bad one, I do not know what the Colonel would be at,for it is as good a one as ever I saw."
"He spoke of its being out of repair."
"Well, and whose fault is that?
why don't he repair it?--who should do it but himself?"
They were interrupted by the servant's coming in toannounce the carriage being at the door; and Mrs. Jenningsimmediately preparing to go, said,--"Well, my dear, I must be gone before I have had halfmy talk out.
But, however, we may have it all over inthe evening; for we shall be quite alone.
I do not askyou to go with me, for I dare say your mind is too fullof the matter to care for company; and besides, you mustlong to tell your sister all about it."
Marianne had left the room before the conversation began.
"Certainly, ma'am, I shall tell Marianne of it;but I shall not mention it at present to any body else."
"Oh!
very well," said Mrs. Jennings rather disappointed.
"Then you would not have me tell it to Lucy, for I thinkof going as far as Holborn to-day."
"No, ma'am, not even Lucy if you please.
One day's delay will not be very material; and till Ihave written to Mr. Ferrars, I think it ought not to bementioned to any body else.
I shall do THAT directly.
It is of importance that no time should be lost with him,for he will of course have much to do relative tohis ordination."
This speech at first puzzled Mrs. Jennings exceedingly.
Why Mr. Ferrars was to have been written to about itin such a hurry, she could not immediately comprehend.
A few moments' reflection, however, produced a very happy idea,and she exclaimed;--"Oh, ho!--I understand you.
Mr. Ferrars is to bethe man.
Well, so much the better for him.
Ay, to be sure,he must be ordained in readiness; and I am very gladto find things are so forward between you.
But, my dear,is not this rather out of character?
Should not the Colonelwrite himself?--sure, he is the proper person."
Elinor did not quite understand the beginning ofMrs. Jennings's speech, neither did she think it worthinquiring into; and therefore only replied to its conclusion.
"Colonel Brandon is so delicate a man, that he ratherwished any one to announce his intentions to Mr. Ferrarsthan himself."
"And so YOU are forced to do it.
Well THAT is an oddkind of delicacy!
However, I will not disturb you (seeingher preparing to write.)
You know your own concerns best.
So goodby, my dear.
I have not heard of any thing toplease me so well since Charlotte was brought to bed."
And away she went; but returning again in a moment,"I have just been thinking of Betty's sister, my dear.
I should be very glad to get her so good a mistress.
But whether she would do for a lady's maid, I am sure Ican't tell.
She is an excellent housemaid, and worksvery well at her needle.
However, you will think of allthat at your leisure."
"Certainly, ma'am," replied Elinor, not hearingmuch of what she said, and more anxious to be alone,than to be mistress of the subject.
How she should begin--how she should expressherself in her note to Edward, was now all her concern.
The particular circumstances between them madea difficulty of that which to any other person wouldhave been the easiest thing in the world; but sheequally feared to say too much or too little, and satdeliberating over her paper, with the pen in her band,till broken in on by the entrance of Edward himself.
He had met Mrs. Jennings at the door in her way tothe carriage, as he came to leave his farewell card; and she,after apologising for not returning herself, had obligedhim to enter, by saying that Miss Dashwood was above,and wanted to speak with him on very particular business.
Elinor had just been congratulating herself,in the midst of her perplexity, that however difficult itmight be to express herself properly by letter, it wasat least preferable to giving the information by wordof mouth, when her visitor entered, to force her upon thisgreatest exertion of all.
Her astonishment and confusionwere very great on his so sudden appearance.
She hadnot seen him before since his engagement became public,and therefore not since his knowing her to be acquaintedwith it; which, with the consciousness of what shehad been thinking of, and what she had to tell him,made her feel particularly uncomfortable for some minutes.
He too was much distressed; and they sat down togetherin a most promising state of embarrassment.--Whether hehad asked her pardon for his intrusion on first cominginto the room, he could not recollect; but determiningto be on the safe side, he made his apology in formas soon as he could say any thing, after taking a chair.
"Mrs. Jennings told me," said he, "that you wishedto speak with me, at least I understood her so--or Icertainly should not have intruded on you in such a manner;though at the same time, I should have been extremelysorry to leave London without seeing you and your sister;especially as it will most likely be some time--itis not probable that I should soon have the pleasureof meeting you again.
I go to Oxford tomorrow."
"You would not have gone, however," said Elinor,recovering herself, and determined to get over what sheso much dreaded as soon as possible, "without receivingour good wishes, even if we had not been able to give themin person.
Mrs. Jennings was quite right in what she said.
I have something of consequence to inform you of,which I was on the point of communicating by paper.
I am charged with a most agreeable office (breathingrather faster than usual as she spoke.)
Colonel Brandon,who was here only ten minutes ago, has desired me to say,that understanding you mean to take orders, he hasgreat pleasure in offering you the living of Delafordnow just vacant, and only wishes it were more valuable.
Allow me to congratulate you on having so respectableand well-judging a friend, and to join in his wish thatthe living--it is about two hundred a-year--were muchmore considerable, and such as might better enable youto--as might be more than a temporary accommodation toyourself--such, in short, as might establish all your viewsof happiness."
What Edward felt, as he could not say it himself,it cannot be expected that any one else should say for him.
He LOOKED all the astonishment which such unexpected,such unthought-of information could not fail of exciting;but he said only these two words,"Colonel Brandon!"
"Yes," continued Elinor, gathering more resolution,as some of the worst was over, "Colonel Brandon meansit as a testimony of his concern for what has latelypassed--for the cruel situation in which the unjustifiableconduct of your family has placed you--a concernwhich I am sure Marianne, myself, and all your friends,must share; and likewise as a proof of his high esteemfor your general character, and his particular approbationof your behaviour on the present occasion."
"Colonel Brandon give ME a living!--Can it be possible?"
"The unkindness of your own relations has made youastonished to find friendship any where."
"No," replied be, with sudden consciousness, "not tofind it in YOU; for I cannot be ignorant that to you,to your goodness, I owe it all.--I feel it--I would expressit if I could--but, as you well know, I am no orator."
"You are very much mistaken.
I do assure youthat you owe it entirely, at least almost entirely,to your own merit, and Colonel Brandon's discernmentof it.
I have had no hand in it.
I did not even know,till I understood his design, that the living was vacant;nor had it ever occurred to me that he might havehad such a living in his gift.
As a friend of mine,of my family, he may, perhaps--indeed I know he HAS,still greater pleasure in bestowing it; but, upon my word,you owe nothing to my solicitation."
Truth obliged her to acknowledge some small sharein the action, but she was at the same time so unwillingto appear as the benefactress of Edward, that she acknowledgedit with hesitation; which probably contributed to fixthat suspicion in his mind which had recently entered it.
For a short time he sat deep in thought, after Elinor had ceasedto speak;--at last, and as if it were rather an effort, he said,"Colonel Brandon seems a man of great worth and respectability.
I have always heard him spoken of as such, and your brotherI know esteems him highly.
He is undoubtedly a sensible man,and in his manners perfectly the gentleman."
"Indeed," replied Elinor, "I believe that you will find him,on farther acquaintance, all that you have heard him to be,and as you will be such very near neighbours (for I understandthe parsonage is almost close to the mansion-house,)it is particularly important that he SHOULD be all this."
Edward made no answer; but when she had turnedaway her head, gave her a look so serious, so earnest,so uncheerful, as seemed to say, that he might hereafter wishthe distance between the parsonage and the mansion-housemuch greater.
"Colonel Brandon, I think, lodges in St. James Street,"said he, soon afterwards, rising from his chair.
Elinor told him the number of the house.
"I must hurry away then, to give him those thankswhich you will not allow me to give YOU; to assure himthat he has made me a very--an exceedingly happy man."
Elinor did not offer to detain him; and they parted,with a very earnest assurance on HER side of her unceasinggood wishes for his happiness in every change of situationthat might befall him; on HIS, with rather an attempt toreturn the same good will, than the power of expressing it.
"When I see him again," said Elinor to herself,as the door shut him out, "I shall see him the husbandof Lucy."
And with this pleasing anticipation, she sat downto reconsider the past, recall the words and endeavourto comprehend all the feelings of Edward; and, of course,to reflect on her own with discontent.
When Mrs. Jennings came home, though she returnedfrom seeing people whom she had never seen before,and of whom therefore she must have a great deal to say,her mind was so much more occupied by the important secretin her possession, than by anything else, that shereverted to it again as soon as Elinor appeared.
"Well, my dear," she cried, "I sent you up to theyoung man.
Did not I do right?--And I suppose you hadno great difficulty--You did not find him very unwillingto accept your proposal?"
"No, ma'am; THAT was not very likely."
"Well, and how soon will he be ready?--For it seemsall to depend upon that."
"Really," said Elinor, "I know so little of these kindof forms, that I can hardly even conjecture as to the time,or the preparation necessary; but I suppose two or threemonths will complete his ordination."
"Two or three months!"
cried Mrs. Jennings; "Lord!
my dear,how calmly you talk of it; and can the Colonel wait twoor three months!
Lord bless me!--I am sure it would put MEquite out of patience!--And though one would be very gladto do a kindness by poor Mr. Ferrars, I do think it isnot worth while to wait two or three months for him.
Sure somebody else might be found that would do as well;somebody that is in orders already."
"My dear ma'am," said Elinor, "what can you be thinking of?--Why, Colonel Brandon's only object is to be of use to Mr.
Ferrars."
"Lord bless you, my dear!--Sure you do not mean to persuademe that the Colonel only marries you for the sake of givingten guineas to Mr.
Ferrars!"
The deception could not continue after this;and an explanation immediately took place, by which bothgained considerable amusement for the moment, without anymaterial loss of happiness to either, for Mrs. Jenningsonly exchanged one form of delight for another, and stillwithout forfeiting her expectation of the first.
"Aye, aye, the parsonage is but a small one," said she,after the first ebullition of surprise and satisfactionwas over, "and very likely MAY be out of repair; but to heara man apologising, as I thought, for a house that to myknowledge has five sitting rooms on the ground-floor, and Ithink the housekeeper told me could make up fifteen beds!--and to you too, that had been used to live in Barton cottage!--It seems quite ridiculous.
But, my dear, we musttouch up the Colonel to do some thing to the parsonage,and make it comfortable for them, before Lucy goes to it."
"But Colonel Brandon does not seem to have any ideaof the living's being enough to allow them to marry."
"The Colonel is a ninny, my dear; because he has twothousand a-year himself, he thinks that nobody else can marryon less.
Take my word for it, that, if I am alive, I shallbe paying a visit at Delaford Parsonage before Michaelmas;and I am sure I sha'nt go if Lucy an't there."
Elinor was quite of her opinion, as to the probabilityof their not waiting for any thing more.
CHAPTER 41Edward, having carried his thanks to Colonel Brandon,proceeded with his happiness to Lucy; and such was theexcess of it by the time he reached Bartlett's Buildings,that she was able to assure Mrs. Jennings, who calledon her again the next day with her congratulations,that she had never seen him in such spirits beforein her life.
Her own happiness, and her own spirits, were atleast very certain; and she joined Mrs. Jennings mostheartily in her expectation of their being all comfortablytogether in Delaford Parsonage before Michaelmas.
So far was she, at the same time, from any backwardnessto give Elinor that credit which Edward WOULD give her,that she spoke of her friendship for them both with the mostgrateful warmth, was ready to own all their obligationto her, and openly declared that no exertion for theirgood on Miss Dashwood's part, either present or future,would ever surprise her, for she believed her capable ofdoing any thing in the world for those she really valued.
As for Colonel Brandon, she was not only ready to worshiphim as a saint, but was moreover truly anxious thathe should be treated as one in all worldly concerns;anxious that his tithes should be raised to the utmost;and scarcely resolved to avail herself, at Delaford,as far as she possibly could, of his servants, his carriage,his cows, and his poultry.
It was now above a week since John Dashwood hadcalled in Berkeley Street, and as since that time no noticehad been taken by them of his wife's indisposition,beyond one verbal enquiry, Elinor began to feel itnecessary to pay her a visit.--This was an obligation,however, which not only opposed her own inclination,but which had not the assistance of any encouragementfrom her companions.
Marianne, not contented withabsolutely refusing to go herself, was very urgentto prevent her sister's going at all; and Mrs. Jennings,though her carriage was always at Elinor's service,so very much disliked Mrs. John Dashwood, that not even hercuriosity to see how she looked after the late discovery,nor her strong desire to affront her by taking Edward's part,could overcome her unwillingness to be in her company again.
The consequence was, that Elinor set out by herselfto pay a visit, for which no one could really haveless inclination, and to run the risk of a tete-a-tetewith a woman, whom neither of the others had so muchreason to dislike.
Mrs. Dashwood was denied; but before the carriage couldturn from the house, her husband accidentally came out.
He expressed great pleasure in meeting Elinor, told herthat he had been just going to call in Berkeley Street,and, assuring her that Fanny would be very glad to see her,invited her to come in.
They walked up stairs in to the drawing-room.--Nobody was there.
"Fanny is in her own room, I suppose," said he:--"Iwill go to her presently, for I am sure she will nothave the least objection in the world to seeing YOU.--Very far from it, indeed.
NOW especially therecannot be--but however, you and Marianne were alwaysgreat favourites.--Why would not Marianne come?"
--Elinor made what excuse she could for her.
"I am not sorry to see you alone," he replied,"for I have a good deal to say to you.
This livingof Colonel Brandon's--can it be true?--has he really givenit to Edward?--I heard it yesterday by chance, and wascoming to you on purpose to enquire farther about it."
"It is perfectly true.--Colonel Brandon has giventhe living of Delaford to Edward."
"Really!--Well, this is very astonishing!--norelationship!--no connection between them!--and nowthat livings fetch such a price!--what was the value of this?"
"About two hundred a year."
"Very well--and for the next presentation to a livingof that value--supposing the late incumbent to havebeen old and sickly, and likely to vacate it soon--hemight have got I dare say--fourteen hundred pounds.
And how came he not to have settled that matter before thisperson's death?--NOW indeed it would be too late to sell it,but a man of Colonel Brandon's sense!--I wonder he shouldbe so improvident in a point of such common, such natural,concern!--Well, I am convinced that there is a vast dealof inconsistency in almost every human character.
I suppose,however--on recollection--that the case may probably be THIS.
Edward is only to hold the living till the person to whomthe Colonel has really sold the presentation, is old enoughto take it.--Aye, aye, that is the fact, depend upon it."
Elinor contradicted it, however, very positively;and by relating that she had herself been employedin conveying the offer from Colonel Brandon to Edward,and, therefore, must understand the terms on which itwas given, obliged him to submit to her authority.
"It is truly astonishing!"
--he cried, after hearingwhat she said--"what could be the Colonel's motive?"
"A very simple one--to be of use to Mr.
Ferrars."
"Well, well; whatever Colonel Brandon may be,Edward is a very lucky man.--You will not mention the matterto Fanny, however, for though I have broke it to her,and she bears it vastly well,--she will not like to hearit much talked of."
Elinor had some difficulty here to refrain from observing,that she thought Fanny might have borne with composure,an acquisition of wealth to her brother, by which neithershe nor her child could be possibly impoverished.
"Mrs. Ferrars," added he, lowering his voice to thetone becoming so important a subject, "knows nothingabout it at present, and I believe it will be best tokeep it entirely concealed from her as long as may be.--When the marriage takes place, I fear she must hearof it all."
"But why should such precaution be used?--Thoughit is not to be supposed that Mrs. Ferrars can havethe smallest satisfaction in knowing that her son hasmoney enough to live upon,--for THAT must be quiteout of the question; yet why, upon her late behaviour,is she supposed to feel at all?--She has done with herson, she cast him off for ever, and has made all thoseover whom she had any influence, cast him off likewise.
Surely, after doing so, she cannot be imagined liableto any impression of sorrow or of joy on his account--she cannot be interested in any thing that befalls him.--She would not be so weak as to throw away the comfortof a child, and yet retain the anxiety of a parent!"
"Ah!
Elinor," said John, "your reasoning is very good,but it is founded on ignorance of human nature.
When Edward's unhappy match takes place, depend upon ithis mother will feel as much as if she had never discarded him;and, therefore every circumstance that may accelerate thatdreadful event, must be concealed from her as much as possible.
Mrs. Ferrars can never forget that Edward is her son."
"You surprise me; I should think it must nearlyhave escaped her memory by THIS time."
"You wrong her exceedingly.
Mrs. Ferrars is oneof the most affectionate mothers in the world."
Elinor was silent.
"We think NOW,"--said Mr. Dashwood, after a short pause,"of ROBERT'S marrying Miss Morton."
Elinor, smiling at the grave and decisive importanceof her brother's tone, calmly replied,"The lady, I suppose, has no choice in the affair."
"Choice!--how do you mean?"
"I only mean that I suppose, from your mannerof speaking, it must be the same to Miss Morton whethershe marry Edward or Robert."
"Certainly, there can be no difference; for Robertwill now to all intents and purposes be consideredas the eldest son;--and as to any thing else, they areboth very agreeable young men: I do not know that oneis superior to the other."
Elinor said no more, and John was also for a shorttime silent.--His reflections ended thus.
"Of ONE thing, my dear sister," kindly taking her hand,and speaking in an awful whisper,--"I may assure you;--and I WILL do it, because I know it must gratify you.
I have good reason to think--indeed I have it from thebest authority, or I should not repeat it, for otherwiseit would be very wrong to say any thing about it--butI have it from the very best authority--not that I everprecisely heard Mrs. Ferrars say it herself--but herdaughter DID, and I have it from her--That in short,whatever objections there might be against a certain--acertain connection--you understand me--it would have beenfar preferable to her, it would not have given her halfthe vexation that THIS does.
I was exceedingly pleasedto hear that Mrs. Ferrars considered it in that light--a very gratifying circumstance you know to us all.
'It would have been beyond comparison,' she said, 'the leastevil of the two, and she would be glad to compound NOWfor nothing worse.'
But however, all that is quite outof the question--not to be thought of or mentioned--as to any attachment you know--it never could be--allthat is gone by.
But I thought I would just tell youof this, because I knew how much it must please you.
Not that you have any reason to regret, my dear Elinor.
Thereis no doubt of your doing exceedingly well--quite as well,or better, perhaps, all things considered.
Has ColonelBrandon been with you lately?"
Elinor had heard enough, if not to gratify her vanity,and raise her self-importance, to agitate her nervesand fill her mind;--and she was therefore glad to bespared from the necessity of saying much in reply herself,and from the danger of hearing any thing more fromher brother, by the entrance of Mr. Robert Ferrars.
After a few moments' chat, John Dashwood, recollecting thatFanny was yet uninformed of her sister's being there,quitted the room in quest of her; and Elinor was leftto improve her acquaintance with Robert, who, by thegay unconcern, the happy self-complacency of his mannerwhile enjoying so unfair a division of his mother's loveand liberality, to the prejudice of his banished brother,earned only by his own dissipated course of life, and thatbrother's integrity, was confirming her most unfavourableopinion of his head and heart.
They had scarcely been two minutes by themselves,before he began to speak of Edward; for he, too, had heardof the living, and was very inquisitive on the subject.
Elinor repeated the particulars of it, as she had given themto John; and their effect on Robert, though very different,was not less striking than it had been on HIM.
He laughedmost immoderately.
The idea of Edward's being a clergyman,and living in a small parsonage-house, diverted himbeyond measure;--and when to that was added the fancifulimagery of Edward reading prayers in a white surplice,and publishing the banns of marriage between John Smith andMary Brown, he could conceive nothing more ridiculous.
Elinor, while she waited in silence and immovablegravity, the conclusion of such folly, could not restrainher eyes from being fixed on him with a look that spokeall the contempt it excited.
It was a look, however,very well bestowed, for it relieved her own feelings, and gaveno intelligence to him.
He was recalled from wit to wisdom,not by any reproof of her's, but by his own sensibility.
"We may treat it as a joke," said he, at last,recovering from the affected laugh which had considerablylengthened out the genuine gaiety of the moment--"but, uponmy soul, it is a most serious business.
Poor Edward!
he is ruined for ever.
I am extremely sorry for it--for I know him to be a very good-hearted creature; aswell-meaning a fellow perhaps, as any in the world.
You must not judge of him, Miss Dashwood, from YOURslight acquaintance.--Poor Edward!--His manners are certainlynot the happiest in nature.--But we are not all born,you know, with the same powers,--the same address.--Poor fellow!--to see him in a circle of strangers!--to be sure it was pitiable enough!--but upon my soul,I believe he has as good a heart as any in the kingdom;and I declare and protest to you I never was so shocked in mylife, as when it all burst forth.
I could not believe it.--My mother was the first person who told me of it;and I, feeling myself called on to act with resolution,immediately said to her, 'My dear madam, I do not knowwhat you may intend to do on the occasion, but as for myself,I must say, that if Edward does marry this young woman,I never will see him again.'
That was what I said immediately.--I was most uncommonly shocked, indeed!--Poor Edward!--he hasdone for himself completely--shut himself out for ever fromall decent society!--but, as I directly said to my mother,I am not in the least surprised at it; from his styleof education, it was always to be expected.
My poor motherwas half frantic."
"Have you ever seen the lady?"
"Yes; once, while she was staying in this house,I happened to drop in for ten minutes; and I sawquite enough of her.
The merest awkward country girl,without style, or elegance, and almost without beauty.--I remember her perfectly.
Just the kind of girl Ishould suppose likely to captivate poor Edward.
I offered immediately, as soon as my mother relatedthe affair to me, to talk to him myself, and dissuadehim from the match; but it was too late THEN, I found,to do any thing, for unluckily, I was not in the wayat first, and knew nothing of it till after the breachhad taken place, when it was not for me, you know,to interfere.
But had I been informed of it a fewhours earlier--I think it is most probable--that somethingmight have been hit on.
I certainly should have representedit to Edward in a very strong light.
'My dear fellow,'I should have said, 'consider what you are doing.
You are making a most disgraceful connection, and such a oneas your family are unanimous in disapproving.'
I cannothelp thinking, in short, that means might have been found.
But now it is all too late.
He must be starved, you know;--that is certain; absolutely starved."
He had just settled this point with great composure,when the entrance of Mrs. John Dashwood put an end to thesubject.
But though SHE never spoke of it out of her own family,Elinor could see its influence on her mind, in the somethinglike confusion of countenance with which she entered,and an attempt at cordiality in her behaviour to herself.
She even proceeded so far as to be concerned to findthat Elinor and her sister were so soon to leave town,as she had hoped to see more of them;--an exertionin which her husband, who attended her into the room,and hung enamoured over her accents, seemed to distinguishevery thing that was most affectionate and graceful.
CHAPTER 42One other short call in Harley Street, in which Elinorreceived her brother's congratulations on their travellingso far towards Barton without any expense, and on ColonelBrandon's being to follow them to Cleveland in a day or two,completed the intercourse of the brother and sistersin town;--and a faint invitation from Fanny, to cometo Norland whenever it should happen to be in their way,which of all things was the most unlikely to occur,with a more warm, though less public, assurance, from Johnto Elinor, of the promptitude with which he should cometo see her at Delaford, was all that foretold any meetingin the country.
It amused her to observe that all her friends seemeddetermined to send her to Delaford;--a place, in which,of all others, she would now least chuse to visit,or wish to reside; for not only was it considered asher future home by her brother and Mrs. Jennings, but even Lucy,when they parted, gave her a pressing invitation to visit her there.
Very early in April, and tolerably early in the day,the two parties from Hanover Square and Berkeley Street setout from their respective homes, to meet, by appointment,on the road.
For the convenience of Charlotte and her child,they were to be more than two days on their journey,and Mr. Palmer, travelling more expeditiously with Colonel Brandon,was to join them at Cleveland soon after their arrival.
Marianne, few as had been her hours of comfortin London, and eager as she had long been to quit it,could not, when it came to the point, bid adieu tothe house in which she had for the last time enjoyedthose hopes, and that confidence, in Willoughby,which were now extinguished for ever, without great pain.
Nor could she leave the place in which Willoughby remained,busy in new engagements, and new schemes, in which SHEcould have no share, without shedding many tears.
Elinor's satisfaction, at the moment of removal,was more positive.
She had no such object for her lingeringthoughts to fix on, she left no creature behind, from whomit would give her a moment's regret to be divided for ever,she was pleased to be free herself from the persecutionof Lucy's friendship, she was grateful for bringingher sister away unseen by Willoughby since his marriage,and she looked forward with hope to what a few monthsof tranquility at Barton might do towards restoringMarianne's peace of mind, and confirming her own.
Their journey was safely performed.
The secondday brought them into the cherished, or the prohibited,county of Somerset, for as such was it dwelt on by turnsin Marianne's imagination; and in the forenoon of the thirdthey drove up to Cleveland.
Cleveland was a spacious, modern-built house,situated on a sloping lawn.
It had no park, but thepleasure-grounds were tolerably extensive; and likeevery other place of the same degree of importance,it had its open shrubbery, and closer wood walk,a road of smooth gravel winding round a plantation,led to the front, the lawn was dotted over with timber,the house itself was under the guardianship of the fir,the mountain-ash, and the acacia, and a thick screen ofthem altogether, interspersed with tall Lombardy poplars,shut out the offices.
Marianne entered the house with a heart swellingwith emotion from the consciousness of being only eightymiles from Barton, and not thirty from Combe Magna;and before she had been five minutes within its walls,while the others were busily helping Charlotte to showher child to the housekeeper, she quitted it again,stealing away through the winding shrubberies, now justbeginning to be in beauty, to gain a distant eminence;where, from its Grecian temple, her eye, wandering overa wide tract of country to the south-east, could fondlyrest on the farthest ridge of hills in the horizon,and fancy that from their summits Combe Magna might be seen.
In such moments of precious, invaluable misery,she rejoiced in tears of agony to be at Cleveland;and as she returned by a different circuit to the house,feeling all the happy privilege of country liberty,of wandering from place to place in free and luxurious solitude,she resolved to spend almost every hour of every daywhile she remained with the Palmers, in the indulgence ofsuch solitary rambles.
She returned just in time to join the othersas they quitted the house, on an excursion through itsmore immediate premises; and the rest of the morning waseasily whiled away, in lounging round the kitchen garden,examining the bloom upon its walls, and listening to thegardener's lamentations upon blights, in dawdling throughthe green-house, where the loss of her favourite plants,unwarily exposed, and nipped by the lingering frost,raised the laughter of Charlotte,--and in visiting herpoultry-yard, where, in the disappointed hopes of herdairy-maid, by hens forsaking their nests, or beingstolen by a fox, or in the rapid decrease of a promisingyoung brood, she found fresh sources of merriment.
The morning was fine and dry, and Marianne,in her plan of employment abroad, had not calculatedfor any change of weather during their stay at Cleveland.
With great surprise therefore, did she find herself preventedby a settled rain from going out again after dinner.
She had depended on a twilight walk to the Grecian temple,and perhaps all over the grounds, and an evening merelycold or damp would not have deterred her from it;but a heavy and settled rain even SHE could not fancy dryor pleasant weather for walking.
Their party was small, and the hours passed quietly away.
Mrs. Palmer had her child, and Mrs. Jennings her carpet-work;they talked of the friends they had left behind,arranged Lady Middleton's engagements, and wonderedwhether Mr. Palmer and Colonel Brandon would get fartherthan Reading that night.
Elinor, however little concernedin it, joined in their discourse; and Marianne, who hadthe knack of finding her way in every house to the library,however it might be avoided by the family in general,soon procured herself a book.
Nothing was wanting on Mrs. Palmer's side that constantand friendly good humour could do, to make them feelthemselves welcome.
The openness and heartiness of hermanner more than atoned for that want of recollectionand elegance which made her often deficient in the formsof politeness; her kindness, recommended by so prettya face, was engaging; her folly, though evidentwas not disgusting, because it was not conceited;and Elinor could have forgiven every thing but her laugh.
The two gentlemen arrived the next day to a verylate dinner, affording a pleasant enlargement of the party,and a very welcome variety to their conversation, which along morning of the same continued rain had reduced very low.
Elinor had seen so little of Mr. Palmer, and in thatlittle had seen so much variety in his address to hersister and herself, that she knew not what to expectto find him in his own family.
She found him, however,perfectly the gentleman in his behaviour to all his visitors,and only occasionally rude to his wife and her mother;she found him very capable of being a pleasant companion,and only prevented from being so always, by too greatan aptitude to fancy himself as much superior to peoplein general, as he must feel himself to be to Mrs. Jenningsand Charlotte.
For the rest of his character and habits,they were marked, as far as Elinor could perceive,with no traits at all unusual in his sex and time of life.
He was nice in his eating, uncertain in his hours;fond of his child, though affecting to slight it;and idled away the mornings at billiards, which oughtto have been devoted to business.
She liked him, however,upon the whole, much better than she had expected, and inher heart was not sorry that she could like him no more;--not sorry to be driven by the observation of his Epicurism,his selfishness, and his conceit, to rest with complacencyon the remembrance of Edward's generous temper, simple taste,and diffident feelings.
Of Edward, or at least of some of his concerns,she now received intelligence from Colonel Brandon,who had been into Dorsetshire lately; and who,treating her at once as the disinterested friendof Mr. Ferrars, and the kind of confidant of himself,talked to her a great deal of the parsonage at Delaford,described its deficiencies, and told her what he meantto do himself towards removing them.--His behaviourto her in this, as well as in every other particular,his open pleasure in meeting her after an absenceof only ten days, his readiness to converse with her,and his deference for her opinion, might very welljustify Mrs. Jennings's persuasion of his attachment,and would have been enough, perhaps, had not Elinor still,as from the first, believed Marianne his real favourite,to make her suspect it herself.
But as it was,such a notion had scarcely ever entered her head,except by Mrs. Jennings's suggestion; and she couldnot help believing herself the nicest observer of thetwo;--she watched his eyes, while Mrs. Jennings thoughtonly of his behaviour;--and while his looks of anxioussolicitude on Marianne's feeling, in her head and throat,the beginning of a heavy cold, because unexpressed by words,entirely escaped the latter lady's observation;--SHE coulddiscover in them the quick feelings, and needless alarmof a lover.
Two delighful twilight walks on the third and fourthevenings of her being there, not merely on the dry gravelof the shrubbery, but all over the grounds, and especiallyin the most distant parts of them, where there was somethingmore of wildness than in the rest, where the trees werethe oldest, and the grass was the longest and wettest,had--assisted by the still greater imprudence of sittingin her wet shoes and stockings--given Marianne a coldso violent as, though for a day or two trifled withor denied, would force itself by increasing ailments onthe concern of every body, and the notice of herself.
Prescriptions poured in from all quarters, and as usual,were all declined.
Though heavy and feverish, with a painin her limbs, and a cough, and a sore throat, a good night'srest was to cure her entirely; and it was with difficultythat Elinor prevailed on her, when she went to bed,to try one or two of the simplest of the remedies.
CHAPTER 43Marianne got up the next morning at her usual time;to every inquiry replied that she was better, and tried toprove herself so, by engaging in her accustomary employments.
But a day spent in sitting shivering over the firewith a book in her hand, which she was unable to read,or in lying, weary and languid, on a sofa, did not speakmuch in favour of her amendment; and when, at last,she went early to bed, more and more indisposed, ColonelBrandon was only astonished at her sister's composure,who, though attending and nursing her the whole day,against Marianne inclination, and forcing proper medicineson her at night, trusted, like Marianne, to the certaintyand efficacy of sleep, and felt no real alarm.
A very restless and feverish night, however,disappointed the expectation of both; and when Marianne,after persisting in rising, confessed herself unableto sit up, and returned voluntarily to her bed,Elinor was very ready to adopt Mrs. Jennings's advice,of sending for the Palmers' apothecary.
He came, examined his patient, and though encouragingMiss Dashwood to expect that a very few days would restoreher sister to health, yet, by pronouncing her disorderto have a putrid tendency, and allowing the word "infection"to pass his lips, gave instant alarm to Mrs. Palmer,on her baby's account.
Mrs. Jennings, who had been inclinedfrom the first to think Marianne's complaint more seriousthan Elinor, now looked very grave on Mr. Harris's report,and confirming Charlotte's fears and caution, urged thenecessity of her immediate removal with her infant;and Mr. Palmer, though treating their apprehensions as idle,found the anxiety and importunity of his wife too greatto be withstood.
Her departure, therefore, was fixed on;and within an hour after Mr. Harris's arrival, she set off,with her little boy and his nurse, for the house of anear relation of Mr. Palmer's, who lived a few mileson the other side of Bath; whither her husband promised,at her earnest entreaty, to join her in a day or two;and whither she was almost equally urgent with hermother to accompany her.
Mrs. Jennings, however, with akindness of heart which made Elinor really love her,declared her resolution of not stirring from Clevelandas long as Marianne remained ill, and of endeavouring,by her own attentive care, to supply to her the placeof the mother she had taken her from; and Elinor found heron every occasion a most willing and active helpmate,desirous to share in all her fatigues, and often by herbetter experience in nursing, of material use.
Poor Marianne, languid and low from the natureof her malady, and feeling herself universally ill,could no longer hope that tomorrow would find her recovered;and the idea of what tomorrow would have produced,but for this unlucky illness, made every ailment severe;for on that day they were to have begun their journey home;and, attended the whole way by a servant of Mrs. Jennings,were to have taken their mother by surprise on thefollowing forenoon.
The little she said was all inlamentation of this inevitable delay; though Elinor triedto raise her spirits, and make her believe, as she THENreally believed herself, that it would be a very short one.
The next day produced little or no alteration in thestate of the patient; she certainly was not better, and,except that there was no amendment, did not appear worse.
Their party was now farther reduced; for Mr. Palmer,though very unwilling to go as well from real humanityand good-nature, as from a dislike of appearing to befrightened away by his wife, was persuaded at lastby Colonel Brandon to perform his promise of following her;and while he was preparing to go, Colonel Brandon himself,with a much greater exertion, began to talk of goinglikewise.--Here, however, the kindness of Mrs. Jenningsinterposed most acceptably; for to send the Colonel awaywhile his love was in so much uneasiness on her sister'saccount, would be to deprive them both, she thought,of every comfort; and therefore telling him at oncethat his stay at Cleveland was necessary to herself,that she should want him to play at piquet of an evening,while Miss Dashwood was above with her sister, &c. sheurged him so strongly to remain, that he, who was gratifyingthe first wish of his own heart by a compliance, could notlong even affect to demur; especially as Mrs. Jennings'sentreaty was warmly seconded by Mr. Palmer, who seemedto feel a relief to himself, in leaving behind him a personso well able to assist or advise Miss Dashwood in any emergence.
Marianne was, of course, kept in ignorance of allthese arrangements.
She knew not that she had beenthe means of sending the owners of Cleveland away,in about seven days from the time of their arrival.
It gave her no surprise that she saw nothingof Mrs. Palmer; and as it gave her likewise no concern,she never mentioned her name.
Two days passed away from the time of Mr. Palmer's departure,and her situation continued, with little variation,the same.
Mr. Harris, who attended her every day,still talked boldly of a speedy recovery, and Miss Dashwoodwas equally sanguine; but the expectation of the otherswas by no means so cheerful.
Mrs. Jennings had determinedvery early in the seizure that Marianne would neverget over it, and Colonel Brandon, who was chieflyof use in listening to Mrs. Jennings's forebodings,was not in a state of mind to resist their influence.
He tried to reason himself out of fears, which the differentjudgment of the apothecary seemed to render absurd;but the many hours of each day in which he was leftentirely alone, were but too favourable for the admissionof every melancholy idea, and he could not expel fromhis mind the persuasion that he should see Marianne no more.
On the morning of the third day however, the gloomyanticipations of both were almost done away; for whenMr. Harris arrived, he declared his patient materially better.
Her pulse was much stronger, and every symptom more favourablethan on the preceding visit.
Elinor, confirmed in everypleasant hope, was all cheerfulness; rejoicing thatin her letters to her mother, she had pursued her ownjudgment rather than her friend's, in making very lightof the indisposition which delayed them at Cleveland;and almost fixing on the time when Marianne would beable to travel.
But the day did not close so auspiciously as it began.--Towards the evening Marianne became ill again, growingmore heavy, restless, and uncomfortable than before.
Her sister, however, still sanguine, was willing toattribute the change to nothing more than the fatigueof having sat up to have her bed made; and carefullyadministering the cordials prescribed, saw her, withsatisfaction, sink at last into a slumber, from whichshe expected the most beneficial effects.
Her sleep,though not so quiet as Elinor wished to see it,lasted a considerable time; and anxious to observethe result of it herself, she resolved to sit with herduring the whole of it.
Mrs. Jennings, knowing nothingof any change in the patient, went unusually early to bed;her maid, who was one of the principal nurses, was recreatingherself in the housekeeper's room, and Elinor remainedalone with Marianne.
The repose of the latter became more and more disturbed;and her sister, who watched, with unremitting attentionher continual change of posture, and heard the frequentbut inarticulate sounds of complaint which passed her lips,was almost wishing to rouse her from so painful a slumber,when Marianne, suddenly awakened by some accidental noisein the house, started hastily up, and, with feverish wildness,cried out,--"Is mama coming?--""Not yet," cried the other, concealing her terror,and assisting Marianne to lie down again, "but she willbe here, I hope, before it is long.
It is a great way,you know, from hence to Barton."
"But she must not go round by London," cried Marianne,in the same hurried manner.
"I shall never see her,if she goes by London."
Elinor perceived with alarm that she was notquite herself, and, while attempting to soothe her,eagerly felt her pulse.
It was lower and quicker than ever!
and Marianne, still talking wildly of mama, her alarmincreased so rapidly, as to determine her on sendinginstantly for Mr. Harris, and despatching a messengerto Barton for her mother.
To consult with Colonel Brandonon the best means of effecting the latter, was a thoughtwhich immediately followed the resolution of its performance;and as soon she had rung up the maid to take her placeby her sister, she hastened down to the drawing-room,where she knew he was generally to be found at a muchlater hour than the present.
It was no time for hesitation.
Her fears and herdifficulties were immediately before him.
Her fears,he had no courage, no confidence to attempt the removal of:--he listened to them in silent despondence;--but herdifficulties were instantly obviated, for with a readinessthat seemed to speak the occasion, and the servicepre-arranged in his mind, he offered himself as themessenger who should fetch Mrs. Dashwood.
Elinor made noresistance that was not easily overcome.
She thanked himwith brief, though fervent gratitude, and while he wentto hurry off his servant with a message to Mr. Harris, andan order for post-horses directly, she wrote a few linesto her mother.
The comfort of such a friend at that moment as ColonelBrandon--or such a companion for her mother,--how gratefullywas it felt!--a companion whose judgment would guide,whose attendance must relieve, and whose friendship mightsoothe her!--as far as the shock of such a summons COULDbe lessened to her, his presence, his manners, his assistance,would lessen it.
HE, meanwhile, whatever he might feel, acted with allthe firmness of a collected mind, made every necessaryarrangement with the utmost despatch, and calculatedwith exactness the time in which she might look forhis return.
Not a moment was lost in delay of any kind.
The horses arrived, even before they were expected,and Colonel Brandon only pressing her hand with a lookof solemnity, and a few words spoken too low to reach her ear,hurried into the carriage.
It was then about twelveo'clock, and she returned to her sister's apartment to waitfor the arrival of the apothecary, and to watch by herthe rest of the night.
It was a night of almost equalsuffering to both.
Hour after hour passed away in sleeplesspain and delirium on Marianne's side, and in the mostcruel anxiety on Elinor's, before Mr. Harris appeared.
Her apprehensions once raised, paid by their excess for allher former security; and the servant who sat up with her,for she would not allow Mrs. Jennings to be called,only tortured her more, by hints of what her mistresshad always thought.
Marianne's ideas were still, at intervals,fixed incoherently on her mother, and whenever shementioned her name, it gave a pang to the heart ofpoor Elinor, who, reproaching herself for having trifledwith so many days of illness, and wretched for someimmediate relief, fancied that all relief might soonbe in vain, that every thing had been delayed too long,and pictured to herself her suffering mother arrivingtoo late to see this darling child, or to see her rational.
She was on the point of sending again for Mr. Harris,or if HE could not come, for some other advice,when the former--but not till after five o'clock--arrived.
His opinion, however, made some little amends for his delay,for though acknowledging a very unexpected and unpleasantalteration in his patient, he would not allow the dangerto be material, and talked of the relief which a freshmode of treatment must procure, with a confidence which,in a lesser degree, was communicated to Elinor.
He promisedto call again in the course of three or four hours,and left both the patient and her anxious attendant morecomposed than he had found them.
With strong concern, and with many reproaches for notbeing called to their aid, did Mrs. Jennings hear in themorning of what had passed.
Her former apprehensions,now with greater reason restored, left her no doubt ofthe event; and though trying to speak comfort to Elinor,her conviction of her sister's danger would not allow herto offer the comfort of hope.
Her heart was really grieved.
The rapid decay, the early death of a girl so young,so lovely as Marianne, must have struck a less interestedperson with concern.
On Mrs. Jennings's compassionshe had other claims.
She had been for three monthsher companion, was still under her care, and she wasknown to have been greatly injured, and long unhappy.
The distress of her sister too, particularly a favourite,was before her;--and as for their mother, when Mrs. Jenningsconsidered that Marianne might probably be to HER whatCharlotte was to herself, her sympathy in HER sufferingswas very sincere.
Mr. Harris was punctual in his second visit;--but he came to be disappointed in his hopes of what thelast would produce.
His medicines had failed;--the feverwas unabated; and Marianne only more quiet--not moreherself--remained in a heavy stupor.
Elinor, catching all,and more than all, his fears in a moment, proposed to callin further advice.
But he judged it unnecessary: he hadstill something more to try, some more fresh application,of whose success he was as confident as the last, and hisvisit concluded with encouraging assurances which reachedthe ear, but could not enter the heart of Miss Dashwood.
She was calm, except when she thought of her mother;but she was almost hopeless; and in this state she continuedtill noon, scarcely stirring from her sister's bed,her thoughts wandering from one image of grief,one suffering friend to another, and her spirits oppressedto the utmost by the conversation of Mrs. Jennings,who scrupled not to attribute the severity and dangerof this attack to the many weeks of previous indispositionwhich Marianne's disappointment had brought on.
Elinor felt all the reasonableness of the idea, and itgave fresh misery to her reflections.
About noon, however, she began--but with a caution--adread of disappointment which for some time kept her silent,even to her friend--to fancy, to hope she could perceivea slight amendment in her sister's pulse;--she waited,watched, and examined it again and again;--and at last,with an agitation more difficult to bury under exterior calmness,than all her foregoing distress, ventured to communicateher hopes.
Mrs. Jennings, though forced, on examination,to acknowledge a temporary revival, tried to keep heryoung friend from indulging a thought of its continuance;--and Elinor, conning over every injunction of distrust,told herself likewise not to hope.
But it was too late.
Hope had already entered; and feeling all its anxious flutter,she bent over her sister to watch--she hardly knew for what.
Half an hour passed away, and the favourable symptomyet blessed her.
Others even arose to confirm it.
Her breath, her skin, her lips, all flattered Elinorwith signs of amendment; and Marianne fixed her eyes onher with a rational, though languid, gaze.
Anxiety andhope now oppressed her in equal degrees, and left her nomoment of tranquillity till the arrival of Mr. Harris atfour o'clock;--when his assurances, his felicitations ona recovery in her sister even surpassing his expectation,gave her confidence, comfort, and tears of joy.
Marianne was in every respect materially better,and he declared her entirely out of danger.
Mrs. Jennings,perhaps satisfied with the partial justification of herforebodings which had been found in their late alarm,allowed herself to trust in his judgment, and admitted,with unfeigned joy, and soon with unequivocal cheerfulness,the probability of an entire recovery.
Elinor could not be cheerful.
Her joy was of adifferent kind, and led to any thing rather than to gaiety.
Marianne restored to life, health, friends, and to herdoting mother, was an idea to fill her heart with sensationsof exquisite comfort, and expand it in fervent gratitude;--but it lead to no outward demonstrations of joy, no words,no smiles.
All within Elinor's breast was satisfaction,silent and strong.
She continued by the side of her sister, with littleintermission the whole afternoon, calming every fear,satisfying every inquiry of her enfeebled spirits,supplying every succour, and watching almost every look andevery breath.
The possibility of a relapse would of course,in some moments, occur to remind her of what anxiety was--but when she saw, on her frequent and minute examination,that every symptom of recovery continued, and saw Marianneat six o'clock sink into a quiet, steady, and to allappearance comfortable, sleep, she silenced every doubt.
The time was now drawing on, when Colonel Brandonmight be expected back.
At ten o'clock, she trusted,or at least not much later her mother would be relievedfrom the dreadful suspense in which she must now betravelling towards them.
The Colonel, too!--perhaps scarcelyless an object of pity!--Oh!--how slow was the progressof time which yet kept them in ignorance!
At seven o'clock, leaving Marianne still sweetly asleep,she joined Mrs. Jennings in the drawing-room to tea.
Of breakfast she had been kept by her fears, and ofdinner by their sudden reverse, from eating much;--and the present refreshment, therefore, with such feelingsof content as she brought to it, was particularly welcome.
Mrs. Jennings would have persuaded her, at its conclusion,to take some rest before her mother's arrival, and allow HER totake her place by Marianne; but Elinor had no sense of fatigue,no capability of sleep at that moment about her, and she wasnot to be kept away from her sister an unnecessary instant.
Mrs. Jennings therefore attending her up stairs into thesick chamber, to satisfy herself that all continued right,left her there again to her charge and her thoughts,and retired to her own room to write letters and sleep.
The night was cold and stormy.
The wind roaredround the house, and the rain beat against the windows;but Elinor, all happiness within, regarded it not.
Marianne slept through every blast; and the travellers--they had a rich reward in store, for every present inconvenience.
The clock struck eight.
Had it been ten,Elinor would have been convinced that at that momentshe heard a carriage driving up to the house;and so strong was the persuasion that she DID, in spiteof the ALMOST impossibility of their being already come,that she moved into the adjoining dressing-closet andopened a window shutter, to be satisfied of the truth.
She instantly saw that her ears had not deceived her.
The flaring lamps of a carriage were immediately in view.
By their uncertain light she thought she could discern itto be drawn by four horses; and this, while it told theexcess of her poor mother's alarm, gave some explanationto such unexpected rapidity.
Never in her life had Elinor found it so difficultto be calm, as at that moment.
The knowledge of what hermother must be feeling as the carriage stopt at the door--of her doubt--her dread--perhaps her despair!--andof what SHE had to tell!--with such knowledge it wasimpossible to be calm.
All that remained to be donewas to be speedy; and, therefore staying only tillshe could leave Mrs. Jennings's maid with her sister,she hurried down stairs.
The bustle in the vestibule, as she passed alongan inner lobby, assured her that they were alreadyin the house.
She rushed to the drawing-room,--sheentered it,--and saw only Willoughby.
CHAPTER 44Elinor, starting back with a look of horror atthe sight of him, obeyed the first impulse of her heartin turning instantly to quit the room, and her handwas already on the lock, when its action was suspendedby his hastily advancing, and saying, in a voice ratherof command than supplication,"Miss Dashwood, for half an hour--for ten minutes--I entreat you to stay."
"No, sir," she replied with firmness, "I shall NOT stay.
Your business cannot be with ME.
The servants, I suppose,forgot to tell you that Mr. Palmer was not in the house."
"Had they told me," he cried with vehemence,"that Mr. Palmer and all his relations were at the devil,it would not have turned me from the door.
My businessis with you, and only you."
"With me!"
--in the utmost amazement--"well, sir,--be quick--and if you can--less violent."
"Sit down, and I will be both."
She hesitated; she knew not what to do.
The possibilityof Colonel Brandon's arriving and finding her there,came across her.
But she had promised to hear him,and her curiosity no less than her honor was engaged.
After a moment's recollection, therefore, concluding thatprudence required dispatch, and that her acquiescence wouldbest promote it, she walked silently towards the table,and sat down.
He took the opposite chair, and for halfa minute not a word was said by either.
"Pray be quick, sir,"--said Elinor, impatiently;--"I have no time to spare."
He was sitting in an attitude of deep meditation,and seemed not to hear her.
"Your sister," said he, with abruptness, a momentafterwards--"is out of danger.
I heard it from the servant.
God be praised!--But is it true?
is it really true?"
Elinor would not speak.
He repeated the inquiry withyet greater eagerness.
"For God's sake tell me, is she out of danger, or is she not?"
"We hope she is."
He rose up, and walked across the room.
"Had I known as much half an hour ago--Butsince I AM here,"--speaking with a forced vivacity as hereturned to his seat--"what does it signify?--For once,Miss Dashwood--it will be the last time, perhaps--let usbe cheerful together.--I am in a fine mood for gaiety.--Tell me honestly"--a deeper glow overspreading his cheeks--"do you think me most a knave or a fool?"
Elinor looked at him with greater astonishment than ever.
She began to think that be must be in liquor;--thestrangeness of such a visit, and of such manners,seemed no otherwise intelligible; and with this impressionshe immediately rose, saying,"Mr. Willoughby, I advise you at present to returnto Combe--I am not at leisure to remain with you longer.--Whatever your business may be with me, will it be betterrecollected and explained to-morrow."
"I understand you," he replied, with an expressive smile,and a voice perfectly calm; "yes, I am very drunk.--A pint of porter with my cold beef at Marlborough wasenough to over-set me."
"At Marlborough!"
--cried Elinor, more and more ata loss to understand what he would be at.
"Yes,--I left London this morning at eight o'clock,and the only ten minutes I have spent out of my chaisesince that time procured me a nuncheon at Marlborough."
The steadiness of his manner, and the intelligenceof his eye as he spoke, convincing Elinor, that whateverother unpardonable folly might bring him to Cleveland,he was not brought there by intoxication, she said,after a moment's recollection,"Mr. Willoughby, you OUGHT to feel, and I certainlyDO--that after what has passed--your coming here inthis manner, and forcing yourself upon my notice,requires a very particular excuse.--What is it,that you mean by it?"
--"I mean,"--said he, with serious energy--"if I can,to make you hate me one degree less than you do NOW.
I mean to offer some kind of explanation, some kindof apology, for the past; to open my whole heart to you,and by convincing you, that though I have been alwaysa blockhead, I have not been always a rascal, to obtainsomething like forgiveness from Ma--from your sister."
"Is this the real reason of your coming?"
"Upon my soul it is,"--was his answer, with a warmthwhich brought all the former Willoughby to her remembrance,and in spite of herself made her think him sincere.
"If that is all, you may be satisfied already,--for Marianne DOES--she has LONG forgiven you."
"Has she?"
--he cried, in the same eager tone.--"Then she has forgiven me before she ought to have done it.
But she shall forgive me again, and on more reasonablegrounds.--NOW will you listen to me?"
Elinor bowed her assent.
"I do not know," said he, after a pause of expectationon her side, and thoughtfulness on his own,--"how YOUmay have accounted for my behaviour to your sister,or what diabolical motive you may have imputed to me.--Perhaps you will hardly think the better of me,--it isworth the trial however, and you shall hear every thing.
When I first became intimate in your family, I had noother intention, no other view in the acquaintancethan to pass my time pleasantly while I was obliged to remainin Devonshire, more pleasantly than I had ever done before.
Your sister's lovely person and interesting mannerscould not but please me; and her behaviour to me almostfrom the first, was of a kind--It is astonishing,when I reflect on what it was, and what SHE was, that myheart should have been so insensible!
But at firstI must confess, my vanity only was elevated by it.
Careless of her happiness, thinking only of my own amusement,giving way to feelings which I had always been too muchin the habit of indulging, I endeavoured, by every meansin my power, to make myself pleasing to her, without anydesign of returning her affection."
Miss Dashwood, at this point, turning her eyes on himwith the most angry contempt, stopped him, by saying,"It is hardly worth while, Mr. Willoughby,for you to relate, or for me to listen any longer.
Such a beginning as this cannot be followed by any thing.--Do not let me be pained by hearing any thing more onthe subject."
"I insist on you hearing the whole of it," he replied,"My fortune was never large, and I had always been expensive,always in the habit of associating with people of betterincome than myself.
Every year since my coming of age,or even before, I believe, had added to my debts; and thoughthe death of my old cousin, Mrs. Smith, was to set me free;yet that event being uncertain, and possibly far distant,it had been for some time my intention to re-establish mycircumstances by marrying a woman of fortune.
To attachmyself to your sister, therefore, was not a thing to bethought of;--and with a meanness, selfishness, cruelty--which no indignant, no contemptuous look, even of yours,Miss Dashwood, can ever reprobate too much--I was actingin this manner, trying to engage her regard, without athought of returning it.--But one thing may be saidfor me: even in that horrid state of selfish vanity,I did not know the extent of the injury I meditated,because I did not THEN know what it was to love.
But have I ever known it?--Well may it be doubted; for, had Ireally loved, could I have sacrificed my feelings to vanity,to avarice?--or, what is more, could I have sacrificed hers?--But I have done it.
To avoid a comparative poverty,which her affection and her society would have deprivedof all its horrors, I have, by raising myself to affluence,lost every thing that could make it a blessing."
"You did then," said Elinor, a little softened,"believe yourself at one time attached to her?"
"To have resisted such attractions, to have withstoodsuch tenderness!--Is there a man on earth who could havedone it?--Yes, I found myself, by insensible degrees,sincerely fond of her; and the happiest hours of my lifewere what I spent with her when I felt my intentionswere strictly honourable, and my feelings blameless.
Even THEN, however, when fully determined on payingmy addresses to her, I allowed myself most improperlyto put off, from day to day, the moment of doing it,from an unwillingness to enter into an engagementwhile my circumstances were so greatly embarrassed.
I will not reason here--nor will I stop for YOU to expatiateon the absurdity, and the worse than absurdity, of scruplingto engage my faith where my honour was already bound.
The event has proved, that I was a cunning fool,providing with great circumspection for a possibleopportunity of making myself contemptible and wretchedfor ever.
At last, however, my resolution was taken,and I had determined, as soon as I could engage her alone,to justify the attentions I had so invariably paid her,and openly assure her of an affection which I had alreadytaken such pains to display.
But in the interim--in theinterim of the very few hours that were to pass, before Icould have an opportunity of speaking with her in private--a circumstance occurred--an unlucky circumstance, to ruinall my resolution, and with it all my comfort.
A discoverytook place,"--here he hesitated and looked down.--"Mrs.
Smithhad somehow or other been informed, I imagine by somedistant relation, whose interest it was to deprive me ofher favour, of an affair, a connection--but I need notexplain myself farther," he added, looking at her with anheightened colour and an enquiring eye--"your particularintimacy--you have probably heard the whole story long ago."
"I have," returned Elinor, colouring likewise,and hardening her heart anew against any compassion for him,"I have heard it all.
And how you will explain away anypart of your guilt in that dreadful business, I confessis beyond my comprehension."
"Remember," cried Willoughby, "from whom you receivedthe account.
Could it be an impartial one?
I acknowledgethat her situation and her character ought to have beenrespected by me.
I do not mean to justify myself, but atthe same time cannot leave you to suppose that I have nothingto urge--that because she was injured she was irreproachable,and because I was a libertine, SHE must be a saint.
If the violence of her passions, the weakness of herunderstanding--I do not mean, however, to defend myself.
Her affection for me deserved better treatment, and I often,with great self-reproach, recall the tenderness which,for a very short time, had the power of creating any return.
I wish--I heartily wish it had never been.
But I have injuredmore than herself; and I have injured one, whose affectionfor me--(may I say it?)
was scarcely less warm than hers;and whose mind--Oh!
how infinitely superior!"
--"Your indifference, however, towards that unfortunategirl--I must say it, unpleasant to me as the discussionof such a subject may well be--your indifference is noapology for your cruel neglect of her.
Do not think yourselfexcused by any weakness, any natural defect of understandingon her side, in the wanton cruelty so evident on yours.
You must have known, that while you were enjoying yourselfin Devonshire pursuing fresh schemes, always gay,always happy, she was reduced to the extremest indigence."
"But, upon my soul, I did NOT know it," he warmlyreplied; "I did not recollect that I had omitted to giveher my direction; and common sense might have told herhow to find it out."
"Well, sir, and what said Mrs.
Smith?"
"She taxed me with the offence at once, and my confusionmay be guessed.
The purity of her life, the formalityof her notions, her ignorance of the world--every thingwas against me.
The matter itself I could not deny,and vain was every endeavour to soften it.
She waspreviously disposed, I believe, to doubt the morality of myconduct in general, and was moreover discontented withthe very little attention, the very little portion of mytime that I had bestowed on her, in my present visit.
In short, it ended in a total breach.
By one measure Imight have saved myself.
In the height of her morality,good woman!
she offered to forgive the past, if I wouldmarry Eliza.
That could not be--and I was formallydismissed from her favour and her house.
The nightfollowing this affair--I was to go the next morning--was spent by me in deliberating on what my future conductshould be.
The struggle was great--but it ended too soon.
My affection for Marianne, my thorough conviction of herattachment to me--it was all insufficient to outweighthat dread of poverty, or get the better of those falseideas of the necessity of riches, which I was naturallyinclined to feel, and expensive society had increased.
I had reason to believe myself secure of my present wife,if I chose to address her, and I persuaded myself to thinkthat nothing else in common prudence remained for me to do.
A heavy scene however awaited me, before I could leaveDevonshire;--I was engaged to dine with you on that very day;some apology was therefore necessary for my breakingthis engagement.
But whether I should write this apology,or deliver it in person, was a point of long debate.
To see Marianne, I felt, would be dreadful, and I even doubtedwhether I could see her again, and keep to my resolution.
In that point, however, I undervalued my own magnanimity,as the event declared; for I went, I saw her, and sawher miserable, and left her miserable--and left her hopingnever to see her again."
"Why did you call, Mr.
Willoughby?"
said Elinor,reproachfully; "a note would have answered every purpose.--Why was it necessary to call?"
"It was necessary to my own pride.
I could not bearto leave the country in a manner that might lead you,or the rest of the neighbourhood, to suspect any partof what had really passed between Mrs. Smith and myself--and I resolved therefore on calling at the cottage,in my way to Honiton.
The sight of your dear sister,however, was really dreadful; and, to heighten the matter,I found her alone.
You were all gone I do not know where.
I had left her only the evening before, so fully,so firmly resolved within my self on doing right!
A few hours were to have engaged her to me for ever;and I remember how happy, how gay were my spirits, as Iwalked from the cottage to Allenham, satisfied with myself,delighted with every body!
But in this, our last interviewof friendship, I approached her with a sense of guiltthat almost took from me the power of dissembling.
Her sorrow, her disappointment, her deep regret, when I toldher that I was obliged to leave Devonshire so immediately--Inever shall forget it--united too with such reliance,such confidence in me!--Oh, God!--what a hard-heartedrascal I was!"
They were both silent for a few moments.
Elinor first spoke.
"Did you tell her that you should soon return?"
"I do not know what I told her," he replied, impatiently;"less than was due to the past, beyond a doubt, and in alllikelihood much more than was justified by the future.
I cannot think of it.--It won't do.--Then came your dear motherto torture me farther, with all her kindness and confidence.
Thank Heaven!
it DID torture me.
I was miserable.
Miss Dashwood, you cannot have an idea of the comfort itgives me to look back on my own misery.
I owe such a grudgeto myself for the stupid, rascally folly of my own heart,that all my past sufferings under it are only triumph andexultation to me now.
Well, I went, left all that I loved,and went to those to whom, at best, I was only indifferent.
My journey to town--travelling with my own horses,and therefore so tediously--no creature to speak to--myown reflections so cheerful--when I looked forwardevery thing so inviting!--when I looked back at Barton,the picture so soothing!--oh, it was a blessed journey!"
He stopped.
"Well, sir," said Elinor, who, though pitying him,grew impatient for his departure, "and this is all?"
"Ah!--no,--have you forgot what passed in town?--That infamous letter--Did she shew it you?"
"Yes, I saw every note that passed."
"When the first of hers reached me (as it immediately did,for I was in town the whole time,) what I felt is--in the common phrase, not to be expressed; in a moresimple one--perhaps too simple to raise any emotion--my feelings were very, very painful.--Every line, every wordwas--in the hackneyed metaphor which their dear writer,were she here, would forbid--a dagger to my heart.
To know that Marianne was in town was--in the same language--a thunderbolt.--Thunderbolts and daggers!--what a reproofwould she have given me!--her taste, her opinions--I believethey are better known to me than my own,--and I am surethey are dearer."
Elinor's heart, which had undergone many changesin the course of this extraordinary conversation,was now softened again;--yet she felt it her duty to checksuch ideas in her companion as the last.
"This is not right, Mr.
Willoughby.--Remember thatyou are married.
Relate only what in your conscienceyou think necessary for me to hear."
"Marianne's note, by assuring me that I was stillas dear to her as in former days, that in spite of the many,many weeks we had been separated, she was as constantin her own feelings, and as full of faith in the constancyof mine as ever, awakened all my remorse.
I say awakened,because time and London, business and dissipation,had in some measure quieted it, and I had been growinga fine hardened villain, fancying myself indifferent to her,and chusing to fancy that she too must have becomeindifferent to me; talking to myself of our past attachmentas a mere idle, trifling business, shrugging up my shouldersin proof of its being so, and silencing every reproach,overcoming every scruple, by secretly saying now and then,'I shall be heartily glad to hear she is well married.'
--But this note made me know myself better.
I felt thatshe was infinitely dearer to me than any other womanin the world, and that I was using her infamously.
But every thing was then just settled between Miss Greyand me.
To retreat was impossible.
All that I had to do,was to avoid you both.
I sent no answer to Marianne,intending by that to preserve myself from her farther notice;and for some time I was even determined not to call inBerkeley Street;--but at last, judging it wiser to affectthe air of a cool, common acquaintance than anything else,I watched you all safely out of the house one morning,and left my name."
"Watched us out of the house!"
"Even so.
You would be surprised to hear how oftenI watched you, how often I was on the point of fallingin with you.
I have entered many a shop to avoid your sight,as the carriage drove by.
Lodging as I did in Bond Street,there was hardly a day in which I did not catch a glimpseof one or other of you; and nothing but the most constantwatchfulness on my side, a most invariably prevailingdesire to keep out of your sight, could have separated usso long.
I avoided the Middletons as much as possible,as well as everybody else who was likely to provean acquaintance in common.
Not aware of their beingin town, however, I blundered on Sir John, I believe,the first day of his coming, and the day after I had calledat Mrs. Jennings's.
He asked me to a party, a dance at hishouse in the evening.--Had he NOT told me as an inducementthat you and your sister were to be there, I should havefelt it too certain a thing, to trust myself near him.
The next morning brought another short note from Marianne--still affectionate, open, artless, confiding--everythingthat could make MY conduct most hateful.
I could notanswer it.
I tried--but could not frame a sentence.
But I thought of her, I believe, every moment of the day.
If you CAN pity me, Miss Dashwood, pity my situation as itwas THEN.
With my head and heart full of your sister,I was forced to play the happy lover to another woman!--Thosethree or four weeks were worse than all.
Well, at last,as I need not tell you, you were forced on me; and what asweet figure I cut!--what an evening of agony it was!--Marianne, beautiful as an angel on one side, calling meWilloughby in such a tone!--Oh, God!--holding out her handto me, asking me for an explanation, with those bewitchingeyes fixed in such speaking solicitude on my face!--andSophia, jealous as the devil on the other hand, lookingall that was--Well, it does not signify; it is over now.--Such an evening!--I ran away from you all as soon as I could;but not before I had seen Marianne's sweet face as whiteas death.--THAT was the last, last look I ever had of her;--the last manner in which she appeared to me.
It was a horridsight!--yet when I thought of her to-day as really dying,it was a kind of comfort to me to imagine that I knewexactly how she would appear to those, who saw her lastin this world.
She was before me, constantly before me,as I travelled, in the same look and hue."
A short pause of mutual thoughtfulness succeeded.
Willoughby first rousing himself, broke it thus:"Well, let me make haste and be gone.
Your sisteris certainly better, certainly out of danger?"
"We are assured of it."
"Your poor mother, too!--doting on Marianne."
"But the letter, Mr. Willoughby, your own letter;have you any thing to say about that?"
"Yes, yes, THAT in particular.
Your sisterwrote to me again, you know, the very next morning.
You saw what she said.
I was breakfasting at theEllisons,--and her letter, with some others, was broughtto me there from my lodgings.
It happened to catchSophia's eye before it caught mine--and its size,the elegance of the paper, the hand-writing altogether,immediately gave her a suspicion.
Some vague report hadreached her before of my attachment to some young ladyin Devonshire, and what had passed within her observationthe preceding evening had marked who the young lady was,and made her more jealous than ever.
Affecting that airof playfulness, therefore, which is delightful in a womanone loves, she opened the letter directly, and readits contents.
She was well paid for her impudence.
She read what made her wretched.
Her wretchedness I couldhave borne, but her passion--her malice--At all events itmust be appeased.
And, in short--what do you think of mywife's style of letter-writing?--delicate--tender--truly feminine--was it not?"
"Your wife!--The letter was in your own hand-writing."
"Yes, but I had only the credit of servilely copyingsuch sentences as I was ashamed to put my name to.
The original was all her own--her own happy thoughtsand gentle diction.
But what could I do!--we were engaged,every thing in preparation, the day almost fixed--But I amtalking like a fool.
Preparation!--day!--In honest words,her money was necessary to me, and in a situation likemine, any thing was to be done to prevent a rupture.
And after all, what did it signify to my characterin the opinion of Marianne and her friends, in what languagemy answer was couched?--It must have been only to one end.
My business was to declare myself a scoundrel, and whetherI did it with a bow or a bluster was of little importance.--'I am ruined for ever in their opinion--' said I tomyself--'I am shut out for ever from their society,they already think me an unprincipled fellow, this letterwill only make them think me a blackguard one.'
Such weremy reasonings, as, in a sort of desperate carelessness,I copied my wife's words, and parted with the last relicsof Marianne.
Her three notes--unluckily they were allin my pocketbook, or I should have denied their existence,and hoarded them for ever--I was forced to put them up,and could not even kiss them.
And the lock of hair--that tooI had always carried about me in the same pocket-book,which was now searched by Madam with the most ingratiatingvirulence,--the dear lock--all, every memento was torn from me."
"You are very wrong, Mr. Willoughby, very blamable,"said Elinor, while her voice, in spite of herself,betrayed her compassionate emotion; "you ought not to speakin this way, either of Mrs. Willoughby or my sister.
You had made your own choice.
It was not forced on you.
Your wife has a claim to your politeness, to your respect,at least.
She must be attached to you, or she would nothave married you.
To treat her with unkindness, to speakof her slightingly is no atonement to Marianne--nor can Isuppose it a relief to your own conscience."
"Do not talk to me of my wife," said he with a heavy sigh.--"She does not deserve your compassion.--She knew I had noregard for her when we married.--Well, married we were,and came down to Combe Magna to be happy, and afterwardsreturned to town to be gay.--And now do you pity me,Miss Dashwood?--or have I said all this to no purpose?--Am I--be it only one degree--am I less guilty in your opinionthan I was before?--My intentions were not always wrong.
Have I explained away any part of my guilt?"
"Yes, you have certainly removed something--a little.--You have proved yourself, on the whole, less faulty thanI had believed you.
You have proved your heart less wicked,much less wicked.
But I hardly know--the misery thatyou have inflicted--I hardly know what could have madeit worse."
"Will you repeat to your sister when she is recovered,what I have been telling you?--Let me be a little lightenedtoo in her opinion as well as in yours.
You tell me thatshe has forgiven me already.
Let me be able to fancy thata better knowledge of my heart, and of my present feelings,will draw from her a more spontaneous, more natural, moregentle, less dignified, forgiveness.
Tell her of my miseryand my penitence--tell her that my heart was never inconstantto her, and if you will, that at this moment she is dearerto me than ever."
"I will tell her all that is necessary to what maycomparatively be called, your justification.
But you havenot explained to me the particular reason of your coming now,nor how you heard of her illness."
"Last night, in Drury Lane lobby, I ran against SirJohn Middleton, and when he saw who I was--for the firsttime these two months--he spoke to me.--That he had cutme ever since my marriage, I had seen without surpriseor resentment.
Now, however, his good-natured, honest,stupid soul, full of indignation against me, and concernfor your sister, could not resist the temptation of tellingme what he knew ought to--though probably he did notthink it WOULD--vex me horridly.
As bluntly as he couldspeak it, therefore, he told me that Marianne Dashwoodwas dying of a putrid fever at Cleveland--a letter thatmorning received from Mrs. Jennings declared her dangermost imminent--the Palmers are all gone off in a fright,&c.--I was too much shocked to be able to pass myselfoff as insensible even to the undiscerning Sir John.
His heart was softened in seeing mine suffer; and so muchof his ill-will was done away, that when we parted,he almost shook me by the hand while he reminded me of anold promise about a pointer puppy.
What I felt on hearingthat your sister was dying--and dying too, believing methe greatest villain upon earth, scorning, hating mein her latest moments--for how could I tell what horridprojects might not have been imputed?
ONE person Iwas sure would represent me as capable of any thing--What I felt was dreadful!--My resolution was soon made,and at eight o'clock this morning I was in my carriage.
Now you know all."
Elinor made no answer.
Her thoughts were silently fixedon the irreparable injury which too early an independenceand its consequent habits of idleness, dissipation, and luxury,had made in the mind, the character, the happiness,of a man who, to every advantage of person and talents,united a disposition naturally open and honest, and afeeling, affectionate temper.
The world had made himextravagant and vain--Extravagance and vanity had made himcold-hearted and selfish.
Vanity, while seeking its ownguilty triumph at the expense of another, had involvedhim in a real attachment, which extravagance, or at leastits offspring, necessity, had required to be sacrificed.
Each faulty propensity in leading him to evil, had ledhim likewise to punishment.
The attachment, from whichagainst honour, against feeling, against every better interesthe had outwardly torn himself, now, when no longer allowable,governed every thought; and the connection, for the sakeof which he had, with little scruple, left her sisterto misery, was likely to prove a source of unhappinessto himself of a far more incurable nature.
From a reverieof this kind she was recalled at the end of some minutesby Willoughby, who, rousing himself from a reverie at leastequally painful, started up in preparation for going, and said--"There is no use in staying here; I must be off."
"Are you going back to town?"
"No--to Combe Magna.
I have business there;from thence to town in a day or two.
Good bye."
He held out his hand.
She could not refuse to givehim hers's;--he pressed it with affection.
"And you DO think something better of me thanyou did?"
--said he, letting it fall, and leaning againstthe mantel-piece as if forgetting he was to go.
Elinor assured him that she did;--that she forgave,pitied, wished him well--was even interested in hishappiness--and added some gentle counsel as to the behaviourmost likely to promote it.
His answer was not very encouraging.
"As to that," said he, "I must rub through the worldas well as I can.
Domestic happiness is out of the question.
If, however, I am allowed to think that you and yours feelan interest in my fate and actions, it may be the means--itmay put me on my guard--at least, it may be something tolive for.
Marianne to be sure is lost to me for ever.
Were I even by any blessed chance at liberty again--"Elinor stopped him with a reproof.
"Well,"--he replied--"once more good bye.
I shallnow go away and live in dread of one event."
"What do you mean?"
"Your sister's marriage."
"You are very wrong.
She can never be more lostto you than she is now."
"But she will be gained by some one else.
And ifthat some one should be the very he whom, of all others,I could least bear--but I will not stay to rob myselfof all your compassionate goodwill, by shewingthat where I have most injured I can least forgive.
Good bye,--God bless you!"
And with these words, he almost ran out of the room.
CHAPTER 45Elinor, for some time after he left her, for some timeeven after the sound of his carriage had died away, remainedtoo much oppressed by a crowd of ideas, widely differing inthemselves, but of which sadness was the general result,to think even of her sister.
Willoughby, he, whom only half an hour ago she hadabhorred as the most worthless of men, Willoughby, in spiteof all his faults, excited a degree of commiserationfor the sufferings produced by them, which made herthink of him as now separated for ever from her family,with a tenderness, a regret, rather in proportion, as shesoon acknowledged within herself--to his wishes than tohis merits.
She felt that his influence over her mindwas heightened by circumstances which ought not in reasonto have weight; by that person of uncommon attraction,that open, affectionate, and lively manner which itwas no merit to possess; and by that still ardent lovefor Marianne, which it was not even innocent to indulge.
But she felt that it was so, long, long before she couldfeel his influence less.
When at last she returned to the unconscious Marianne,she found her just awaking, refreshed by so long and sweeta sleep to the extent of her hopes.
Elinor's heart was full.
The past, the present, the future, Willoughby's visit,Marianne's safety, and her mother's expected arrival,threw her altogether into an agitation of spiritswhich kept off every indication of fatigue, and madeher only fearful of betraying herself to her sister.
Short was the time, however, in which that fear couldaffect her, for within half an hour after Willoughby'sleaving the house, she was again called down stairsby the sound of another carriage.--Eager to save hermother from every unnecessary moment's horrible suspense,she ran immediately into the hall, and reached the outwarddoor just in time to receive and support her as she entered it.
Mrs. Dashwood, whose terror as they drew near thehouse had produced almost the conviction of Marianne'sbeing no more, had no voice to inquire after her,no voice even for Elinor; but SHE, waiting neither forsalutation nor inquiry, instantly gave the joyful relief;--and her mother, catching it with all her usual warmth,was in a moment as much overcome by her happiness, as shehad been before by her fears.
She was supported intothe drawing-room between her daughter and her friend;--and there, shedding tears of joy, though still unableto speak, embraced Elinor again and again, turning from herat intervals to press Colonel Brandon's hand, with a lookwhich spoke at once her gratitude, and her convictionof his sharing with herself in the bliss of the moment.
He shared it, however, in a silence even greater than her own.
As soon as Mrs. Dashwood had recovered herself,to see Marianne was her first desire; and in two minutes shewas with her beloved child, rendered dearer to her than everby absence, unhappiness, and danger.
Elinor's delight,as she saw what each felt in the meeting, was only checkedby an apprehension of its robbing Marianne of farther sleep;--but Mrs. Dashwood could be calm, could be even prudent,when the life of a child was at stake, and Marianne,satisfied in knowing her mother was near her, and consciousof being too weak for conversation, submitted readily to thesilence and quiet prescribed by every nurse around her.
Mrs. Dashwood WOULD sit up with her all night; and Elinor,in compliance with her mother's entreaty, went to bed.
But the rest, which one night entirely sleepless,and many hours of the most wearing anxiety seemed tomake requisite, was kept off by irritation of spirits.
Willoughby, "poor Willoughby," as she now allowedherself to call him, was constantly in her thoughts; shewould not but have heard his vindication for the world,and now blamed, now acquitted herself for having judged himso harshly before.
But her promise of relating it to hersister was invariably painful.
She dreaded the performanceof it, dreaded what its effect on Marianne might be;doubted whether after such an explanation she could everbe happy with another; and for a moment wished Willoughbya widower.
Then, remembering Colonel Brandon, reproved herself,felt that to HIS sufferings and his constancy far morethan to his rival's, the reward of her sister was due,and wished any thing rather than Mrs. Willoughby's death.
The shock of Colonel Brandon's errand at Barton had beenmuch softened to Mrs. Dashwood by her own previous alarm;for so great was her uneasiness about Marianne, that shehad already determined to set out for Cleveland on thatvery day, without waiting for any further intelligence,and had so far settled her journey before his arrival,that the Careys were then expected every moment to fetchMargaret away, as her mother was unwilling to take herwhere there might be infection.
Marianne continued to mend every day, and the brilliantcheerfulness of Mrs. Dashwood's looks and spirits provedher to be, as she repeatedly declared herself, one ofthe happiest women in the world.
Elinor could not hearthe declaration, nor witness its proofs without sometimeswondering whether her mother ever recollected Edward.
But Mrs. Dashwood, trusting to the temperate accountof her own disappointment which Elinor had sent her,was led away by the exuberance of her joy to think onlyof what would increase it.
Marianne was restored to herfrom a danger in which, as she now began to feel,her own mistaken judgment in encouraging the unfortunateattachment to Willoughby, had contributed to place her;--and in her recovery she had yet another source of joyunthought of by Elinor.
It was thus imparted to her,as soon as any opportunity of private conferencebetween them occurred.
"At last we are alone.
My Elinor, you do not yetknow all my happiness.
Colonel Brandon loves Marianne.
He has told me so himself."
Her daughter, feeling by turns both pleased and pained,surprised and not surprised, was all silent attention.
"You are never like me, dear Elinor, or I shouldwonder at your composure now.
Had I sat down to wishfor any possible good to my family, I should have fixedon Colonel Brandon's marrying one of you as the objectmost desirable.
And I believe Marianne will be the mosthappy with him of the two."
Elinor was half inclined to ask her reason for thinking so,because satisfied that none founded on an impartialconsideration of their age, characters, or feelings,could be given;--but her mother must always be carriedaway by her imagination on any interesting subject,and therefore instead of an inquiry, she passed it off with asmile.
"He opened his whole heart to me yesterday as we travelled.
It came out quite unawares, quite undesignedly.
I, you maywell believe, could talk of nothing but my child;--he couldnot conceal his distress; I saw that it equalled my own,and he perhaps, thinking that mere friendship, as the worldnow goes, would not justify so warm a sympathy--or rather,not thinking at all, I suppose--giving way to irresistiblefeelings, made me acquainted with his earnest, tender, constant,affection for Marianne.
He has loved her, my Elinor, ever sincethe first moment of seeing her."
Here, however, Elinor perceived,--not the language,not the professions of Colonel Brandon, but the naturalembellishments of her mother's active fancy, which fashionedevery thing delightful to her as it chose.
"His regard for her, infinitely surpassing anythingthat Willoughby ever felt or feigned, as much more warm,as more sincere or constant--which ever we are to call it--has subsisted through all the knowledge of dear Marianne'sunhappy prepossession for that worthless young man!--andwithout selfishness--without encouraging a hope!--couldhe have seen her happy with another--Such a noble mind!--such openness, such sincerity!--no one can be deceivedin HIM."
"Colonel Brandon's character," said Elinor,"as an excellent man, is well established."
"I know it is"--replied her mother seriously, "orafter such a warning, I should be the last to encouragesuch affection, or even to be pleased by it.
But his comingfor me as he did, with such active, such ready friendship,is enough to prove him one of the worthiest of men."
"His character, however," answered Elinor, "does not reston ONE act of kindness, to which his affection for Marianne,were humanity out of the case, would have prompted him.
To Mrs. Jennings, to the Middletons, he has been longand intimately known; they equally love and respect him;and even my own knowledge of him, though lately acquired,is very considerable; and so highly do I value and esteem him,that if Marianne can be happy with him, I shall be as readyas yourself to think our connection the greatest blessingto us in the world.
What answer did you give him?--Did youallow him to hope?"
"Oh!
my love, I could not then talk of hope to himor to myself.
Marianne might at that moment be dying.
But he did not ask for hope or encouragement.
His wasan involuntary confidence, an irrepressible effusionto a soothing friend--not an application to a parent.
Yet after a time I DID say, for at first I was quiteovercome--that if she lived, as I trusted she might,my greatest happiness would lie in promoting their marriage;and since our arrival, since our delightful security,I have repeated it to him more fully, have given him everyencouragement in my power.
Time, a very little time,I tell him, will do everything;--Marianne's heart isnot to be wasted for ever on such a man as Willoughby.--His own merits must soon secure it."
"To judge from the Colonel's spirits, however,you have not yet made him equally sanguine."
"No.--He thinks Marianne's affection too deeplyrooted for any change in it under a great length of time,and even supposing her heart again free, is too diffidentof himself to believe, that with such a difference of ageand disposition he could ever attach her.
There, however,he is quite mistaken.
His age is only so much beyondhers as to be an advantage, as to make his character andprinciples fixed;--and his disposition, I am well convinced,is exactly the very one to make your sister happy.
And his person, his manners too, are all in his favour.
My partiality does not blind me; he certainly is notso handsome as Willoughby--but at the same time,there is something much more pleasing in his countenance.--There was always a something,--if you remember,--in Willoughby'seyes at times, which I did not like."
Elinor could NOT remember it;--but her mother,without waiting for her assent, continued,"And his manners, the Colonel's manners are not onlymore pleasing to me than Willoughby's ever were, but theyare of a kind I well know to be more solidly attachingto Marianne.
Their gentleness, their genuine attentionto other people, and their manly unstudied simplicityis much more accordant with her real disposition, thanthe liveliness--often artificial, and often ill-timedof the other.
I am very sure myself, that had Willoughbyturned out as really amiable, as he has proved himselfthe contrary, Marianne would yet never have been so happywith HIM, as she will be with Colonel Brandon."
She paused.--Her daughter could not quite agreewith her, but her dissent was not heard, and thereforegave no offence.
"At Delaford, she will be within an easy distance of me,"added Mrs. Dashwood, "even if I remain at Barton; and in allprobability,--for I hear it is a large village,--indeed therecertainly MUST be some small house or cottage close by,that would suit us quite as well as our present situation."
Poor Elinor!--here was a new scheme for gettingher to Delaford!--but her spirit was stubborn.
"His fortune too!--for at my time of life you know,everybody cares about THAT;--and though I neither knownor desire to know, what it really is, I am sure it must bea good one."
Here they were interrupted by the entrance of athird person, and Elinor withdrew to think it all overin private, to wish success to her friend, and yetin wishing it, to feel a pang for Willoughby.
CHAPTER 46Marianne's illness, though weakening in its kind,had not been long enough to make her recovery slow;and with youth, natural strength, and her mother's presencein aid, it proceeded so smoothly as to enable her to remove,within four days after the arrival of the latter,into Mrs. Palmer's dressing-room.
When there, at her ownparticular request, for she was impatient to pour forthher thanks to him for fetching her mother, Colonel Brandonwas invited to visit her.
His emotion on entering the room, in seeing her alteredlooks, and in receiving the pale hand which she immediatelyheld out to him, was such, as, in Elinor's conjecture,must arise from something more than his affection for Marianne,or the consciousness of its being known to others;and she soon discovered in his melancholy eye and varyingcomplexion as he looked at her sister, the probablerecurrence of many past scenes of misery to his mind,brought back by that resemblance between Marianne and Elizaalready acknowledged, and now strengthened by the hollow eye,the sickly skin, the posture of reclining weakness,and the warm acknowledgment of peculiar obligation.
Mrs. Dashwood, not less watchful of what passed thanher daughter, but with a mind very differently influenced,and therefore watching to very different effect,saw nothing in the Colonel's behaviour but what arosefrom the most simple and self-evident sensations, while inthe actions and words of Marianne she persuaded herselfto think that something more than gratitude already dawned.
At the end of another day or two, Marianne growingvisibly stronger every twelve hours, Mrs. Dashwood,urged equally by her own and her daughter's wishes,began to talk of removing to Barton.
On HER measuresdepended those of her two friends; Mrs. Jennings couldnot quit Cleveland during the Dashwoods' stay; and ColonelBrandon was soon brought, by their united request,to consider his own abode there as equally determinate,if not equally indispensable.
At his and Mrs. Jennings'sunited request in return, Mrs. Dashwood was prevailedon to accept the use of his carriage on her journey back,for the better accommodation of her sick child; and the Colonel,at the joint invitation of Mrs. Dashwood and Mrs. Jennings,whose active good-nature made her friendly and hospitablefor other people as well as herself, engaged with pleasureto redeem it by a visit at the cottage, in the courseof a few weeks.
The day of separation and departure arrived;and Marianne, after taking so particular and lengtheneda leave of Mrs. Jennings, one so earnestly grateful, so fullof respect and kind wishes as seemed due to her own heartfrom a secret acknowledgment of past inattention, and biddingColonel Brandon farewell with a cordiality of a friend,was carefully assisted by him into the carriage, of which heseemed anxious that she should engross at least half.
Mrs. Dashwood and Elinor then followed, and the otherswere left by themselves, to talk of the travellers,and feel their own dullness, till Mrs. Jennings was summonedto her chaise to take comfort in the gossip of her maidfor the loss of her two young companions; and Colonel Brandonimmediately afterwards took his solitary way to Delaford.
The Dashwoods were two days on the road, and Mariannebore her journey on both, without essential fatigue.
Every thing that the most zealous affection, the mostsolicitous care could do to render her comfortable,was the office of each watchful companion, and eachfound their reward in her bodily ease, and her calmnessof spirits.
To Elinor, the observation of the latterwas particularly grateful.
She, who had seen her weekafter week so constantly suffering, oppressed by anguishof heart which she had neither courage to speak of,nor fortitude to conceal, now saw with a joy, which no othercould equally share, an apparent composure of mind, which,in being the result as she trusted of serious reflection,must eventually lead her to contentment and cheerfulness.
As they approached Barton, indeed, and enteredon scenes of which every field and every tree broughtsome peculiar, some painful recollection, she grew silentand thoughtful, and turning away her face from their notice,sat earnestly gazing through the window.
But here,Elinor could neither wonder nor blame; and when she saw,as she assisted Marianne from the carriage, that shehad been crying, she saw only an emotion too naturalin itself to raise any thing less tender than pity,and in its unobtrusiveness entitled to praise.
In thewhole of her subsequent manner, she traced the directionof a mind awakened to reasonable exertion; for no soonerhad they entered their common sitting-room, than Marianneturned her eyes around it with a look of resolute firmness,as if determined at once to accustom herself to the sightof every object with which the remembrance of Willoughby couldbe connected.--She said little, but every sentence aimedat cheerfulness, and though a sigh sometimes escaped her,it never passed away without the atonement of a smile.
After dinner she would try her piano-forte.
She went to it;but the music on which her eye first rested was an opera,procured for her by Willoughby, containing some of theirfavourite duets, and bearing on its outward leaf her own namein his hand-writing.--That would not do.--She shook her head,put the music aside, and after running over the keysfor a minute, complained of feebleness in her fingers,and closed the instrument again; declaring however with firmnessas she did so, that she should in future practice much.
The next morning produced no abatement in thesehappy symptoms.
On the contrary, with a mind and bodyalike strengthened by rest, she looked and spoke withmore genuine spirit, anticipating the pleasure ofMargaret's return, and talking of the dear family partywhich would then be restored, of their mutual pursuitsand cheerful society, as the only happiness worth a wish.
"When the weather is settled, and I have recoveredmy strength," said she, "we will take long walks togetherevery day.
We will walk to the farm at the edge of the down,and see how the children go on; we will walk to Sir John'snew plantations at Barton Cross, and the Abbeyland;and we will often go the old ruins of the Priory,and try to trace its foundations as far as we are toldthey once reached.
I know we shall be happy.
I knowthe summer will pass happily away.
I mean never to belater in rising than six, and from that time till dinnerI shall divide every moment between music and reading.
I have formed my plan, and am determined to enter on a courseof serious study.
Our own library is too well known to me,to be resorted to for any thing beyond mere amusement.
But there are many works well worth reading at the Park;and there are others of more modern production which Iknow I can borrow of Colonel Brandon.
By reading only sixhours a-day, I shall gain in the course of a twelve-montha great deal of instruction which I now feel myself to want."
Elinor honoured her for a plan which originatedso nobly as this; though smiling to see the same eagerfancy which had been leading her to the extreme of languidindolence and selfish repining, now at work in introducingexcess into a scheme of such rational employment and virtuousself-control.
Her smile however changed to a sigh when sheremembered that promise to Willoughby was yet unfulfilled,and feared she had that to communicate which might againunsettle the mind of Marianne, and ruin at least for a timethis fair prospect of busy tranquillity.
Willing thereforeto delay the evil hour, she resolved to wait till hersister's health were more secure, before she appointed it.
But the resolution was made only to be broken.
Marianne had been two or three days at home, beforethe weather was fine enough for an invalid like herselfto venture out.
But at last a soft, genial morning appeared;such as might tempt the daughter's wishes and themother's confidence; and Marianne, leaning on Elinor's arm,was authorised to walk as long as she could without fatigue,in the lane before the house.
The sisters set out at a pace, slow as the feeblenessof Marianne in an exercise hitherto untried since herillness required;--and they had advanced only so farbeyond the house as to admit a full view of the hill,the important hill behind, when pausing with her eyesturned towards it, Marianne calmly said,"There, exactly there,"--pointing with one hand,"on that projecting mound,--there I fell; and thereI first saw Willoughby."
Her voice sunk with the word, but presently reviving she added,"I am thankful to find that I can look with so little painon the spot!--shall we ever talk on that subject, Elinor?"
--hesitatingly it was said.--"Or will it be wrong?--I can talkof it now, I hope, as I ought to do."
--Elinor tenderly invited her to be open.
"As for regret," said Marianne, "I have done with that,as far as HE is concerned.
I do not mean to talk to youof what my feelings have been for him, but what theyare NOW.--At present, if I could be satisfied on one point,if I could be allowed to think that he was not ALWAYSacting a part, not ALWAYS deceiving me;--but above all,if I could be assured that he never was so VERY wickedas my fears have sometimes fancied him, since the storyof that unfortunate girl"--She stopt.
Elinor joyfully treasured her wordsas she answered,"If you could be assured of that, you think youshould be easy."
"Yes.
My peace of mind is doubly involved in it;--for not only is it horrible to suspect a person, who hasbeen what HE has been to ME, of such designs,--but what mustit make me appear to myself?--What in a situation like mine,but a most shamefully unguarded affection could exposeme to"--"How then," asked her sister, "would you accountfor his behaviour?"
"I would suppose him,--Oh, how gladly would I suppose him,only fickle, very, very fickle."
Elinor said no more.
She was debating within herselfon the eligibility of beginning her story directly,or postponing it till Marianne were in stronger health;--and they crept on for a few minutes in silence.
"I am not wishing him too much good," said Marianneat last with a sigh, "when I wish his secret reflectionsmay be no more unpleasant than my own.
He will sufferenough in them."
"Do you compare your conduct with his?"
"No.
I compare it with what it ought to have been;I compare it with yours."
"Our situations have borne little resemblance."
"They have borne more than our conduct.--Do not,my dearest Elinor, let your kindness defend what I knowyour judgment must censure.
My illness has made me think--It has given me leisure and calmness for serious recollection.
Long before I was enough recovered to talk, I was perfectlyable to reflect.
I considered the past: I saw in myown behaviour, since the beginning of our acquaintancewith him last autumn, nothing but a series of imprudencetowards myself, and want of kindness to others.
I saw that my own feelings had prepared my sufferings,and that my want of fortitude under them had almost ledme to the grave.
My illness, I well knew, had beenentirely brought on by myself by such negligence of myown health, as I had felt even at the time to be wrong.
Had I died,--it would have been self-destruction.
Idid not know my danger till the danger was removed;but with such feelings as these reflections gave me,I wonder at my recovery,--wonder that the very eagernessof my desire to live, to have time for atonement to my God,and to you all, did not kill me at once.
Had I died,--in what peculiar misery should I have left you, my nurse,my friend, my sister!--You, who had seen all the fretfulselfishness of my latter days; who had known all themurmurings of my heart!--How should I have lived in YOURremembrance!--My mother too!
How could you have consoledher!--I cannot express my own abhorrence of myself.
Whenever I looked towards the past, I saw some duty neglected,or some failing indulged.
Every body seemed injured by me.
The kindness, the unceasing kindness of Mrs. Jennings,I had repaid with ungrateful contempt.
To the Middletons,to the Palmers, the Steeles, to every common acquaintance even,I had been insolent and unjust; with a heart hardenedagainst their merits, and a temper irritated by theirvery attention.--To John, to Fanny,--yes, even to them,little as they deserve, I had given less than their due.
But you,--you above all, above my mother, had been wrongedby me.
I, and only I, knew your heart and its sorrows;yet to what did it influence me?--not to any compassionthat could benefit you or myself.--Your example wasbefore me; but to what avail?--Was I more considerateof you and your comfort?
Did I imitate your forbearance,or lessen your restraints, by taking any part in thoseoffices of general complaisance or particular gratitudewhich you had hitherto been left to discharge alone?--No;--not less when I knew you to be unhappy, than when Ihad believed you at ease, did I turn away from everyexertion of duty or friendship; scarcely allowing sorrowto exist but with me, regretting only THAT heartwhich had deserted and wronged me, and leaving you,for or I professed an unbounded affection, to be miserablefor my sake."
Here ceased the rapid flow of her self-reproving spirit;and Elinor, impatient to soothe, though too honestto flatter, gave her instantly that praise and supportwhich her frankness and her contrition so well deserved.
Marianne pressed her hand and replied,"You are very good.--The future must be my proof.
I have laid down my plan, and if I am capable of adheringto it--my feelings shall be governed and my temper improved.
They shall no longer worry others, nor torture myself.
I shall now live solely for my family.
You, my mother,and Margaret, must henceforth be all the world to me;you will share my affections entirely between you.
>From you, from my home, I shall never again have the smallestincitement to move; and if I do mix in other society,it will be only to shew that my spirit is humbled,my heart amended, and that I can practise the civilities,the lesser duties of life, with gentleness and forbearance.
As for Willoughby--to say that I shall soon or that I shallever forget him, would be idle.
His remembrance can be overcomeby no change of circumstances or opinions.
But it shallbe regulated, it shall be checked by religion, by reason,by constant employment."
She paused--and added in a low voice, "If I couldbut know HIS heart, everything would become easy."
Elinor, who had now been for some time reflectingon the propriety or impropriety of speedily hazardingher narration, without feeling at all nearer decision thanat first, heard this; and perceiving that as reflectiondid nothing, resolution must do all, soon found herselfleading to the fact.
She managed the recital, as she hoped, with address;prepared her anxious listener with caution; related simplyand honestly the chief points on which Willoughbygrounded his apology; did justice to his repentance,and softened only his protestations of present regard.
Marianne said not a word.--She trembled, her eyeswere fixed on the ground, and her lips became whiterthan even sickness had left them.
A thousand inquiriessprung up from her heart, but she dared not urge one.
She caught every syllable with panting eagerness; her hand,unknowingly to herself, closely pressed her sister's, andtears covered her cheeks.
Elinor, dreading her being tired, led her towards home;and till they reached the door of the cottage,easily conjecturing what her curiosity must bethough no question was suffered to speak it, talked ofnothing but Willoughby, and their conversation together;and was carefully minute in every particular of speechand look, where minuteness could be safely indulged.
As soon as they entered the house, Marianne with a kissof gratitude and these two words just articulate throughher tears, "Tell mama," withdrew from her sister andwalked slowly up stairs.
Elinor would not attemptto disturb a solitude so reasonable as what she now sought;and with a mind anxiously pre-arranging its result,and a resolution of reviving the subject again,should Marianne fail to do it, she turned into the parlourto fulfill her parting injunction.
CHAPTER 47Mrs. Dashwood did not hear unmoved the vindicationof her former favourite.
She rejoiced in his beingcleared from some part of his imputed guilt;--she wassorry for him;--she wished him happy.
But the feelingsof the past could not be recalled.--Nothing could restorehim with a faith unbroken--a character unblemished,to Marianne.
Nothing could do away the knowledgeof what the latter had suffered through his means,nor remove the guilt of his conduct towards Eliza.
Nothing could replace him, therefore, in her former esteem,nor injure the interests of Colonel Brandon.
Had Mrs. Dashwood, like her daughter, heard Willoughby'sstory from himself--had she witnessed his distress,and been under the influence of his countenance and hismanner, it is probable that her compassion would havebeen greater.
But it was neither in Elinor's power,nor in her wish, to rouse such feelings in another, by herretailed explanation, as had at first been called forthin herself.
Reflection had given calmness to her judgment,and sobered her own opinion of Willoughby's deserts;--she wished, therefore, to declare only the simple truth,and lay open such facts as were really due to his character,without any embellishment of tenderness to lead thefancy astray.
In the evening, when they were all three together,Marianne began voluntarily to speak of him again;--but that it was not without an effort, the restless,unquiet thoughtfulness in which she had been for some timepreviously sitting--her rising colour, as she spoke,--and her unsteady voice, plainly shewed.
"I wish to assure you both," said she, "that I seeevery thing--as you can desire me to do."
Mrs. Dashwood would have interrupted her instantlywith soothing tenderness, had not Elinor, who really wishedto hear her sister's unbiased opinion, by an eager sign,engaged her silence.
Marianne slowly continued--"It is a great relief to me--what Elinor toldme this morning--I have now heard exactly what Iwished to hear."
--For some moments her voice was lost;but recovering herself, she added, and with greatercalmness than before--"I am now perfectly satisfied,I wish for no change.
I never could have been happywith him, after knowing, as sooner or later I musthave known, all this.--I should have had no confidence,no esteem.
Nothing could have done it away to my feelings."
"I know it--I know it," cried her mother.
"Happy with a man of libertine practices!--With onewho so injured the peace of the dearest of our friends,and the best of men!--No--my Marianne has not a heartto be made happy with such a man!--Her conscience, hersensitive conscience, would have felt all that theconscience of her husband ought to have felt."
Marianne sighed, and repeated, "I wish for no change."
"You consider the matter," said Elinor, "exactly asa good mind and a sound understanding must consider it;and I dare say you perceive, as well as myself, not onlyin this, but in many other circumstances, reason enoughto be convinced that your marriage must have involved youin many certain troubles and disappointments, in whichyou would have been poorly supported by an affection,on his side, much less certain.
Had you married,you must have been always poor.
His expensiveness isacknowledged even by himself, and his whole conduct declaresthat self-denial is a word hardly understood by him.
His demands and your inexperience together, on a small,very small income, must have brought on distresses whichwould not be the LESS grievous to you, from having beenentirely unknown and unthought of before.
YOUR senseof honour and honesty would have led you, I know,when aware of your situation, to attempt all the economythat would appear to you possible: and, perhaps, as longas your frugality retrenched only on your own comfort,you might have been suffered to practice it, but beyond that--and how little could the utmost of your single managementdo to stop the ruin which had begun before your marriage?--Beyond THAT, had you endeavoured, however reasonably,to abridge HIS enjoyments, is it not to be feared, that insteadof prevailing on feelings so selfish to consent to it,you would have lessened your own influence on his heart,and made him regret the connection which had involved himin such difficulties?"
Marianne's lips quivered, and she repeated the word"Selfish?"
in a tone that implied--"do you really thinkhim selfish?"
"The whole of his behaviour," replied Elinor,"from the beginning to the end of the affair, has beengrounded on selfishness.
It was selfishness which firstmade him sport with your affections; which afterwards,when his own were engaged, made him delay the confessionof it, and which finally carried him from Barton.
His own enjoyment, or his own ease, was, in every particular,his ruling principle."
"It is very true.
MY happiness never was his object."
"At present," continued Elinor, "he regrets what hehas done.
And why does he regret it?--Because he findsit has not answered towards himself.
It has not madehim happy.
His circumstances are now unembarrassed--hesuffers from no evil of that kind; and he thinks onlythat he has married a woman of a less amiable temperthan yourself.
But does it follow that had he married you,he would have been happy?--The inconveniences would havebeen different.
He would then have suffered under thepecuniary distresses which, because they are removed,he now reckons as nothing.
He would have had a wifeof whose temper he could make no complaint, but he wouldhave been always necessitous--always poor; and probablywould soon have learned to rank the innumerable comfortsof a clear estate and good income as of far more importance,even to domestic happiness, than the mere temper of a wife."
"I have not a doubt of it," said Marianne; "and Ihave nothing to regret--nothing but my own folly."
"Rather say your mother's imprudence, my child,"said Mrs. Dashwood; "SHE must be answerable."
Marianne would not let her proceed;--and Elinor,satisfied that each felt their own error, wished to avoidany survey of the past that might weaken her sister'sspirits; she, therefore, pursuing the first subject,immediately continued,"One observation may, I think, be fairly drawn fromthe whole of the story--that all Willoughby's difficultieshave arisen from the first offence against virtue, in hisbehaviour to Eliza Williams.
That crime has been the originof every lesser one, and of all his present discontents."
Marianne assented most feelingly to the remark;and her mother was led by it to an enumeration of ColonelBrandon's injuries and merits, warm as friendshipand design could unitedly dictate.
Her daughter didnot look, however, as if much of it were heard by her.
Elinor, according to her expectation, saw on the twoor three following days, that Marianne did not continueto gain strength as she had done; but while her resolutionwas unsubdued, and she still tried to appear cheerfuland easy, her sister could safely trust to the effectof time upon her health.
Margaret returned, and the family were again allrestored to each other, again quietly settled at the cottage;and if not pursuing their usual studies with quiteso much vigour as when they first came to Barton,at least planning a vigorous prosecution of them in future.
Elinor grew impatient for some tidings of Edward.
She had heard nothing of him since her leaving London,nothing new of his plans, nothing certain even of hispresent abode.
Some letters had passed between herand her brother, in consequence of Marianne's illness;and in the first of John's, there had been this sentence:--"We know nothing of our unfortunate Edward, and can make noenquiries on so prohibited a subject, but conclude himto be still at Oxford;" which was all the intelligenceof Edward afforded her by the correspondence, for his namewas not even mentioned in any of the succeeding letters.
She was not doomed, however, to be long in ignorance ofhis measures.
Their man-servant had been sent one morning to Exeteron business; and when, as he waited at table, he hadsatisfied the inquiries of his mistress as to the eventof his errand, this was his voluntary communication--"I suppose you know, ma'am, that Mr. Ferrars is married."
Marianne gave a violent start, fixed her eyesupon Elinor, saw her turning pale, and fell back in herchair in hysterics.
Mrs. Dashwood, whose eyes, as sheanswered the servant's inquiry, had intuitively takenthe same direction, was shocked to perceive by Elinor'scountenance how much she really suffered, and a momentafterwards, alike distressed by Marianne's situation,knew not on which child to bestow her principal attention.
The servant, who saw only that Miss Marianne wastaken ill, had sense enough to call one of the maids,who, with Mrs. Dashwood's assistance, supported her intothe other room.
By that time, Marianne was rather better,and her mother leaving her to the care of Margaretand the maid, returned to Elinor, who, though stillmuch disordered, had so far recovered the use of her reasonand voice as to be just beginning an inquiry of Thomas,as to the source of his intelligence.
Mrs. Dashwoodimmediately took all that trouble on herself; and Elinorhad the benefit of the information without the exertionof seeking it.
"Who told you that Mr. Ferrars was married, Thomas?"
"I see Mr. Ferrars myself, ma'am, this morningin Exeter, and his lady too, Miss Steele as was.
They wasstopping in a chaise at the door of the New London Inn,as I went there with a message from Sally at the Parkto her brother, who is one of the post-boys.
I happenedto look up as I went by the chaise, and so I see directlyit was the youngest Miss Steele; so I took off my hat,and she knew me and called to me, and inquired after you,ma'am, and the young ladies, especially Miss Marianne,and bid me I should give her compliments and Mr. Ferrars's,their best compliments and service, and how sorry theywas they had not time to come on and see you, but they wasin a great hurry to go forwards, for they was going furtherdown for a little while, but howsever, when they come back,they'd make sure to come and see you."
"But did she tell you she was married, Thomas?"
"Yes, ma'am.
She smiled, and said how shehad changed her name since she was in these parts.
She was always a very affable and free-spoken young lady,and very civil behaved.
So, I made free to wish her joy."
"Was Mr. Ferrars in the carriage with her?"
"Yes, ma'am, I just see him leaning back in it,but he did not look up;--he never was a gentleman muchfor talking."
Elinor's heart could easily account for his notputting himself forward; and Mrs. Dashwood probablyfound the same explanation.
"Was there no one else in the carriage?"
"No, ma'am, only they two."
"Do you know where they came from?"
"They come straight from town, as Miss Lucy--Mrs. Ferrars told me."
"And are they going farther westward?"
"Yes, ma'am--but not to bide long.
They will soonbe back again, and then they'd be sure and call here."
Mrs. Dashwood now looked at her daughter;but Elinor knew better than to expect them.
She recognised the whole of Lucy in the message, and wasvery confident that Edward would never come near them.
She observed in a low voice, to her mother, that theywere probably going down to Mr. Pratt's, near Plymouth.
Thomas's intelligence seemed over.
Elinor lookedas if she wished to hear more.
"Did you see them off, before you came away?"
"No, ma'am--the horses were just coming out, but Icould not bide any longer; I was afraid of being late."
"Did Mrs. Ferrars look well?"
"Yes, ma'am, she said how she was very well;and to my mind she was always a very handsome younglady--and she seemed vastly contented."
Mrs. Dashwood could think of no other question,and Thomas and the tablecloth, now alike needless,were soon afterwards dismissed.
Marianne had already sentto say, that she should eat nothing more.
Mrs. Dashwood'sand Elinor's appetites were equally lost, and Margaretmight think herself very well off, that with so muchuneasiness as both her sisters had lately experienced,so much reason as they had often had to be carelessof their meals, she had never been obliged to go withouther dinner before.
When the dessert and the wine were arranged,and Mrs. Dashwood and Elinor were left by themselves,they remained long together in a similarity of thoughtfulnessand silence.
Mrs. Dashwood feared to hazard any remark,and ventured not to offer consolation.
She now foundthat she had erred in relying on Elinor's representationof herself; and justly concluded that every thinghad been expressly softened at the time, to spare herfrom an increase of unhappiness, suffering as she thenhad suffered for Marianne.
She found that she had beenmisled by the careful, the considerate attention ofher daughter, to think the attachment, which once shehad so well understood, much slighter in reality, thanshe had been wont to believe, or than it was now provedto be.
She feared that under this persuasion she hadbeen unjust, inattentive, nay, almost unkind, to her Elinor;--that Marianne's affliction, because more acknowledged,more immediately before her, had too much engrossedher tenderness, and led her away to forget that in Elinorshe might have a daughter suffering almost as much,certainly with less self-provocation, and greater fortitude.
CHAPTER 48Elinor now found the difference between the expectationof an unpleasant event, however certain the mind may be toldto consider it, and certainty itself.
She now found, thatin spite of herself, she had always admitted a hope,while Edward remained single, that something would occurto prevent his marrying Lucy; that some resolution ofhis own, some mediation of friends, or some more eligibleopportunity of establishment for the lady, would ariseto assist the happiness of all.
But he was now married;and she condemned her heart for the lurking flattery,which so much heightened the pain of the intelligence.
That he should be married soon, before (as she imagined)he could be in orders, and consequently before he couldbe in possession of the living, surprised her a littleat first.
But she soon saw how likely it was that Lucy,in her self-provident care, in her haste to secure him,should overlook every thing but the risk of delay.
They were married, married in town, and now hasteningdown to her uncle's.
What had Edward felt on being withinfour miles from Barton, on seeing her mother's servant,on hearing Lucy's message!
They would soon, she supposed, be settled atDelaford.--Delaford,--that place in which so muchconspired to give her an interest; which she wishedto be acquainted with, and yet desired to avoid.
She saw them in an instant in their parsonage-house; sawin Lucy, the active, contriving manager, uniting at oncea desire of smart appearance with the utmost frugality,and ashamed to be suspected of half her economical practices;--pursuing her own interest in every thought, courting thefavour of Colonel Brandon, of Mrs. Jennings, and of everywealthy friend.
In Edward--she knew not what she saw,nor what she wished to see;--happy or unhappy,--nothingpleased her; she turned away her head from every sketch of him.
Elinor flattered herself that some one of theirconnections in London would write to them to announcethe event, and give farther particulars,--but day afterday passed off, and brought no letter, no tidings.
Though uncertain that any one were to blame, she foundfault with every absent friend.
They were all thoughtlessor indolent.
"When do you write to Colonel Brandon, ma'am?"
was an inquiry which sprung from the impatienceof her mind to have something going on.
"I wrote to him, my love, last week, and ratherexpect to see, than to hear from him again.
I earnestlypressed his coming to us, and should not be surprisedto see him walk in today or tomorrow, or any day."
This was gaining something, something to look forward to.
Colonel Brandon must have some information to give.
Scarcely had she so determined it, when the figureof a man on horseback drew her eyes to the window.
He stopt at their gate.
It was a gentleman, itwas Colonel Brandon himself.
Now she could hear more;and she trembled in expectation of it.
But--it wasNOT Colonel Brandon--neither his air--nor his height.
Were it possible, she must say it must be Edward.
She looked again.
He had just dismounted;--she could not bemistaken,--it WAS Edward.
She moved away and sat down.
"He comes from Mr. Pratt's purposely to see us.
I WILL becalm; I WILL be mistress of myself."
In a moment she perceived that the others were likewiseaware of the mistake.
She saw her mother and Mariannechange colour; saw them look at herself, and whispera few sentences to each other.
She would have giventhe world to be able to speak--and to make them understandthat she hoped no coolness, no slight, would appearin their behaviour to him;--but she had no utterance,and was obliged to leave all to their own discretion.
Not a syllable passed aloud.
They all waitedin silence for the appearance of their visitor.
His footsteps were heard along the gravel path; in a momenthe was in the passage, and in another he was before them.
His countenance, as he entered the room, was nottoo happy, even for Elinor.
His complexion was whitewith agitation, and he looked as if fearful of hisreception, and conscious that he merited no kind one.
Mrs. Dashwood, however, conforming, as she trusted,to the wishes of that daughter, by whom she then meantin the warmth of her heart to be guided in every thing,met with a look of forced complacency, gave him her hand,and wished him joy.
He coloured, and stammered out an unintelligible reply.
Elinor's lips had moved with her mother's, and, when themoment of action was over, she wished that she had shakenhands with him too.
But it was then too late, and with acountenance meaning to be open, she sat down againand talked of the weather.
Marianne had retreated as much as possibleout of sight, to conceal her distress; and Margaret,understanding some part, but not the whole of the case,thought it incumbent on her to be dignified, and thereforetook a seat as far from him as she could, and maintaineda strict silence.
When Elinor had ceased to rejoice in the drynessof the season, a very awful pause took place.
It was putan end to by Mrs. Dashwood, who felt obliged to hope that hehad left Mrs. Ferrars very well.
In a hurried manner,he replied in the affirmative.
Another pause.
Elinor resolving to exert herself, though fearingthe sound of her own voice, now said,"Is Mrs. Ferrars at Longstaple?"
"At Longstaple!"
he replied, with an air of surprise.--"No, my mother is in town."
"I meant," said Elinor, taking up some work fromthe table, "to inquire for Mrs. EDWARD Ferrars."
She dared not look up;--but her mother and Marianne bothturned their eyes on him.
He coloured, seemed perplexed,looked doubtingly, and, after some hesitation, said,--"Perhaps you mean--my brother--you mean Mrs.--Mrs.ROBERT Ferrars."
"Mrs. Robert Ferrars!"
--was repeated by Marianne and hermother in an accent of the utmost amazement;--and thoughElinor could not speak, even HER eyes were fixed on himwith the same impatient wonder.
He rose from his seat,and walked to the window, apparently from not knowingwhat to do; took up a pair of scissors that lay there,and while spoiling both them and their sheath by cuttingthe latter to pieces as he spoke, said, in a hurried voice,"Perhaps you do not know--you may not have heardthat my brother is lately married to--to the youngest--toMiss Lucy Steele."
His words were echoed with unspeakable astonishmentby all but Elinor, who sat with her head leaning overher work, in a state of such agitation as made her hardlyknow where she was.
"Yes," said he, "they were married last week,and are now at Dawlish."
Elinor could sit it no longer.
She almost ranout of the room, and as soon as the door was closed,burst into tears of joy, which at first she thought wouldnever cease.
Edward, who had till then looked any where,rather than at her, saw her hurry away, and perhaps saw--or even heard, her emotion; for immediately afterwardshe fell into a reverie, which no remarks, no inquiries,no affectionate address of Mrs. Dashwood could penetrate,and at last, without saying a word, quitted the room,and walked out towards the village--leaving the othersin the greatest astonishment and perplexity on a changein his situation, so wonderful and so sudden;--a perplexitywhich they had no means of lessening but by theirown conjectures.
CHAPTER 49Unaccountable, however, as the circumstances of hisrelease might appear to the whole family, it was certainthat Edward was free; and to what purpose that freedom wouldbe employed was easily pre-determined by all;--for afterexperiencing the blessings of ONE imprudent engagement,contracted without his mother's consent, as he had alreadydone for more than four years, nothing less could be expectedof him in the failure of THAT, than the immediate contractionof another.
His errand at Barton, in fact, was a simple one.
It was only to ask Elinor to marry him;--and consideringthat he was not altogether inexperienced in such a question,it might be strange that he should feel so uncomfortablein the present case as he really did, so much in need ofencouragement and fresh air.
How soon he had walked himself into the properresolution, however, how soon an opportunity of exercisingit occurred, in what manner he expressed himself,and how he was received, need not be particularly told.
This only need be said;--that when they all sat down totable at four o'clock, about three hours after his arrival,he had secured his lady, engaged her mother's consent,and was not only in the rapturous profession ofthe lover, but, in the reality of reason and truth,one of the happiest of men.
His situation indeed wasmore than commonly joyful.
He had more than the ordinarytriumph of accepted love to swell his heart, and raisehis spirits.
He was released without any reproachto himself, from an entanglement which had long formedhis misery, from a woman whom he had long ceased to love;--and elevated at once to that security with another,which he must have thought of almost with despair,as soon as he had learnt to consider it with desire.
He was brought, not from doubt or suspense, but frommisery to happiness;--and the change was openly spokenin such a genuine, flowing, grateful cheerfulness,as his friends had never witnessed in him before.
His heart was now open to Elinor, all its weaknesses,all its errors confessed, and his first boyish attachmentto Lucy treated with all the philosophic dignity of twenty-four.
"It was a foolish, idle inclination on my side,"said he, "the consequence of ignorance of the world--and want of employment.
Had my brother given mesome active profession when I was removed at eighteenfrom the care of Mr. Pratt, I think--nay, I am sure,it would never have happened; for though I left Longstaplewith what I thought, at the time, a most unconquerablepreference for his niece, yet had I then had any pursuit,any object to engage my time and keep me at a distancefrom her for a few months, I should very soon haveoutgrown the fancied attachment, especially by mixingmore with the world, as in such case I must have done.
But instead of having any thing to do, instead of having anyprofession chosen for me, or being allowed to chuse any myself,I returned home to be completely idle; and for the firsttwelvemonth afterwards I had not even the nominal employment,which belonging to the university would have given me;for I was not entered at Oxford till I was nineteen.
I had therefore nothing in the world to do, but to fancymyself in love; and as my mother did not make my homein every respect comfortable, as I had no friend,no companion in my brother, and disliked new acquaintance,it was not unnatural for me to be very often at Longstaple,where I always felt myself at home, and was always sureof a welcome; and accordingly I spent the greatest partof my time there from eighteen to nineteen: Lucy appearedeverything that was amiable and obliging.
She was prettytoo--at least I thought so THEN; and I had seen so littleof other women, that I could make no comparisons, and seeno defects.
Considering everything, therefore, I hope,foolish as our engagement was, foolish as it has sincein every way been proved, it was not at the time an unnaturalor an inexcusable piece of folly."
The change which a few hours had wrought in the mindsand the happiness of the Dashwoods, was such--so great--aspromised them all, the satisfaction of a sleepless night.
Mrs. Dashwood, too happy to be comfortable, knew not howto love Edward, nor praise Elinor enough, how to be enoughthankful for his release without wounding his delicacy,nor how at once to give them leisure for unrestrainedconversation together, and yet enjoy, as she wished,the sight and society of both.
Marianne could speak HER happiness only by tears.
Comparisons would occur--regrets would arise;--and her joy,though sincere as her love for her sister, was of a kind togive her neither spirits nor language.
But Elinor--how are HER feelings to be described?--Fromthe moment of learning that Lucy was married to another,that Edward was free, to the moment of his justifyingthe hopes which had so instantly followed, she was everything by turns but tranquil.
But when the second momenthad passed, when she found every doubt, every solicituderemoved, compared her situation with what so lately ithad been,--saw him honourably released from his formerengagement, saw him instantly profiting by the release,to address herself and declare an affection as tender,as constant as she had ever supposed it to be,--shewas oppressed, she was overcome by her own felicity;--and happily disposed as is the human mind to be easilyfamiliarized with any change for the better, it requiredseveral hours to give sedateness to her spirits, or anydegree of tranquillity to her heart.
Edward was now fixed at the cottage at least fora week;--for whatever other claims might be made on him,it was impossible that less than a week should be givenup to the enjoyment of Elinor's company, or sufficeto say half that was to be said of the past, the present,and the future;--for though a very few hours spent inthe hard labor of incessant talking will despatch moresubjects than can really be in common between any tworational creatures, yet with lovers it is different.
Between THEM no subject is finished, no communicationis even made, till it has been made at least twentytimes over.
Lucy's marriage, the unceasing and reasonable wonderamong them all, formed of course one of the earliestdiscussions of the lovers;--and Elinor's particular knowledgeof each party made it appear to her in every view, as oneof the most extraordinary and unaccountable circumstancesshe had ever heard.
How they could be thrown together,and by what attraction Robert could be drawn on to marrya girl, of whose beauty she had herself heard him speakwithout any admiration,--a girl too already engagedto his brother, and on whose account that brother had beenthrown off by his family--it was beyond her comprehensionto make out.
To her own heart it was a delightful affair,to her imagination it was even a ridiculous one, butto her reason, her judgment, it was completely a puzzle.
Edward could only attempt an explanation by supposing,that, perhaps, at first accidentally meeting, the vanityof the one had been so worked on by the flatteryof the other, as to lead by degrees to all the rest.
Elinor remembered what Robert had told her in Harley Street,of his opinion of what his own mediation in his brother'saffairs might have done, if applied to in time.
She repeated it to Edward.
"THAT was exactly like Robert,"--was his immediateobservation.--"And THAT," he presently added, "mightperhaps be in HIS head when the acquaintance betweenthem first began.
And Lucy perhaps at first mightthink only of procuring his good offices in my favour.
Other designs might afterward arise."
How long it had been carrying on between them,however, he was equally at a loss with herself to make out;for at Oxford, where he had remained for choice ever sincehis quitting London, he had had no means of hearing of herbut from herself, and her letters to the very last wereneither less frequent, nor less affectionate than usual.
Not the smallest suspicion, therefore, had ever occurredto prepare him for what followed;--and when at last itburst on him in a letter from Lucy herself, he had beenfor some time, he believed, half stupified betweenthe wonder, the horror, and the joy of such a deliverance.
He put the letter into Elinor's hands.
"DEAR SIR,     "Being very sure I have long lost your affections,     I have thought myself at liberty to bestow my own     on another, and have no doubt of being as happy with     him as I once used to think I might be with you;     but I scorn to accept a hand while the heart was     another's.
Sincerely wish you happy in your choice,     and it shall not be my fault if we are not always     good friends, as our near relationship now makes     proper.
I can safely say I owe you no ill-will,     and am sure you will be too generous to do us any     ill offices.
Your brother has gained my affections     entirely, and as we could not live without one     another, we are just returned from the altar, and     are now on our way to Dawlish for a few weeks, which     place your dear brother has great curiosity to see,     but thought I would first trouble you with these     few lines, and shall always remain,     "Your sincere well-wisher, friend, and sister,                                        "LUCY FERRARS.
"I have burnt all your letters, and will return     your picture the first opportunity.
Please to destroy     my scrawls--but the ring with my hair you are very     welcome to keep."
Elinor read and returned it without any comment.
"I will not ask your opinion of it as a composition,"said Edward.--"For worlds would not I have had a letterof hers seen by YOU in former days.--In a sister itis bad enough, but in a wife!--how I have blushed overthe pages of her writing!--and I believe I may say thatsince the first half year of our foolish--business--thisis the only letter I ever received from her, of whichthe substance made me any amends for the defect of the style."
"However it may have come about," said Elinor,after a pause,--"they are certainly married.
And your motherhas brought on herself a most appropriate punishment.
The independence she settled on Robert, through resentmentagainst you, has put it in his power to make his own choice;and she has actually been bribing one son with a thousanda-year, to do the very deed which she disinherited theother for intending to do.
She will hardly be less hurt,I suppose, by Robert's marrying Lucy, than she would havebeen by your marrying her."
"She will be more hurt by it, for Robert alwayswas her favourite.--She will be more hurt by it,and on the same principle will forgive him much sooner."
In what state the affair stood at present between them,Edward knew not, for no communication with any of his familyhad yet been attempted by him.
He had quitted Oxfordwithin four and twenty hours after Lucy's letter arrived,and with only one object before him, the nearest roadto Barton, had had no leisure to form any scheme of conduct,with which that road did not hold the most intimate connection.
He could do nothing till he were assured of his fate withMiss Dashwood; and by his rapidity in seeking THAT fate,it is to be supposed, in spite of the jealousy withwhich he had once thought of Colonel Brandon, in spiteof the modesty with which he rated his own deserts,and the politeness with which he talked of his doubts,he did not, upon the whole, expect a very cruel reception.
It was his business, however, to say that he DID, and hesaid it very prettily.
What he might say on the subjecta twelvemonth after, must be referred to the imaginationof husbands and wives.
That Lucy had certainly meant to deceive, to go offwith a flourish of malice against him in her messageby Thomas, was perfectly clear to Elinor; and Edward himself,now thoroughly enlightened on her character, had noscruple in believing her capable of the utmost meannessof wanton ill-nature.
Though his eyes had been long opened,even before his acquaintance with Elinor began, to herignorance and a want of liberality in some of her opinions--they had been equally imputed, by him, to her wantof education; and till her last letter reached him,he had always believed her to be a well-disposed,good-hearted girl, and thoroughly attached to himself.
Nothing but such a persuasion could have preventedhis putting an end to an engagement, which, long beforethe discovery of it laid him open to his mother's anger,had been a continual source of disquiet and regret to him.
"I thought it my duty," said he, "independent of my feelings,to give her the option of continuing the engagement or not,when I was renounced by my mother, and stood to allappearance without a friend in the world to assist me.
In such a situation as that, where there seemed nothingto tempt the avarice or the vanity of any living creature,how could I suppose, when she so earnestly, so warmly insistedon sharing my fate, whatever it might be, that any thingbut the most disinterested affection was her inducement?
And even now, I cannot comprehend on what motive she acted,or what fancied advantage it could be to her, to befettered to a man for whom she had not the smallest regard,and who had only two thousand pounds in the world.
She could not foresee that Colonel Brandon would give me aliving."
"No; but she might suppose that something would occurin your favour; that your own family might in time relent.
And at any rate, she lost nothing by continuing the engagement,for she has proved that it fettered neither her inclinationnor her actions.
The connection was certainly arespectable one, and probably gained her consideration amongher friends; and, if nothing more advantageous occurred,it would be better for her to marry YOU than be single."
Edward was, of course, immediately convinced thatnothing could have been more natural than Lucy's conduct,nor more self-evident than the motive of it.
Elinor scolded him, harshly as ladies always scoldthe imprudence which compliments themselves, for havingspent so much time with them at Norland, when he musthave felt his own inconstancy.
"Your behaviour was certainly very wrong," said she;"because--to say nothing of my own conviction, our relationswere all led away by it to fancy and expect WHAT, as youwere THEN situated, could never be."
He could only plead an ignorance of his own heart,and a mistaken confidence in the force of his engagement.
"I was simple enough to think, that because my FAITHwas plighted to another, there could be no danger in my beingwith you; and that the consciousness of my engagement wasto keep my heart as safe and sacred as my honour.
I feltthat I admired you, but I told myself it was only friendship;and till I began to make comparisons between yourselfand Lucy, I did not know how far I was got.
After that,I suppose, I WAS wrong in remaining so much in Sussex,and the arguments with which I reconciled myself to theexpediency of it, were no better than these:--The dangeris my own; I am doing no injury to anybody but myself."
Elinor smiled, and shook her head.
Edward heard with pleasure of Colonel Brandon'sbeing expected at the Cottage, as he really wishednot only to be better acquainted with him, but to have anopportunity of convincing him that he no longer resentedhis giving him the living of Delaford--"Which, at present,"said he, "after thanks so ungraciously delivered as minewere on the occasion, he must think I have never forgivenhim for offering."
NOW he felt astonished himself that he had never yetbeen to the place.
But so little interest had be takenin the matter, that he owed all his knowledge of the house,garden, and glebe, extent of the parish, condition ofthe land, and rate of the tithes, to Elinor herself,who had heard so much of it from Colonel Brandon,and heard it with so much attention, as to be entirelymistress of the subject.
One question after this only remained undecided,between them, one difficulty only was to be overcome.
They were brought together by mutual affection,with the warmest approbation of their real friends;their intimate knowledge of each other seemed to maketheir happiness certain--and they only wanted somethingto live upon.
Edward had two thousand pounds, and Elinorone, which, with Delaford living, was all that they couldcall their own; for it was impossible that Mrs. Dashwoodshould advance anything; and they were neither of themquite enough in love to think that three hundred and fiftypounds a-year would supply them with the comforts of life.
Edward was not entirely without hopes of somefavourable change in his mother towards him; and on THAThe rested for the residue of their income.
But Elinorhad no such dependence; for since Edward would stillbe unable to marry Miss Morton, and his chusing herselfhad been spoken of in Mrs. Ferrars's flattering languageas only a lesser evil than his chusing Lucy Steele,she feared that Robert's offence would serve no otherpurpose than to enrich Fanny.
About four days after Edward's arrival ColonelBrandon appeared, to complete Mrs. Dashwood's satisfaction,and to give her the dignity of having, for the first timesince her living at Barton, more company with her thanher house would hold.
Edward was allowed to retain theprivilege of first comer, and Colonel Brandon thereforewalked every night to his old quarters at the Park;from whence he usually returned in the morning, early enoughto interrupt the lovers' first tete-a-tete before breakfast.
A three weeks' residence at Delaford, where,in his evening hours at least, he had little to dobut to calculate the disproportion between thirty-sixand seventeen, brought him to Barton in a temper of mindwhich needed all the improvement in Marianne's looks,all the kindness of her welcome, and all the encouragementof her mother's language, to make it cheerful.
Among such friends, however, and such flattery, he did revive.
No rumour of Lucy's marriage had yet reached him:--he knewnothing of what had passed; and the first hours of hisvisit were consequently spent in hearing and in wondering.
Every thing was explained to him by Mrs. Dashwood,and he found fresh reason to rejoice in what he had donefor Mr. Ferrars, since eventually it promoted the interestof Elinor.
It would be needless to say, that the gentlemen advancedin the good opinion of each other, as they advanced in eachother's acquaintance, for it could not be otherwise.
Their resemblance in good principles and good sense,in disposition and manner of thinking, would probablyhave been sufficient to unite them in friendship,without any other attraction; but their being in lovewith two sisters, and two sisters fond of each other,made that mutual regard inevitable and immediate,which might otherwise have waited the effect of timeand judgment.
The letters from town, which a few days before wouldhave made every nerve in Elinor's body thrill with transport,now arrived to be read with less emotion that mirth.
Mrs. Jennings wrote to tell the wonderful tale, to vent herhonest indignation against the jilting girl, and pour forthher compassion towards poor Mr. Edward, who, she was sure,had quite doted upon the worthless hussy, and was now,by all accounts, almost broken-hearted, at Oxford.--"I do think," she continued, "nothing was ever carriedon so sly; for it was but two days before Lucy calledand sat a couple of hours with me.
Not a soul suspectedanything of the matter, not even Nancy, who, poor soul!
came crying to me the day after, in a great frightfor fear of Mrs. Ferrars, as well as not knowing how toget to Plymouth; for Lucy it seems borrowed all hermoney before she went off to be married, on purposewe suppose to make a show with, and poor Nancy had notseven shillings in the world;--so I was very glad to giveher five guineas to take her down to Exeter, where shethinks of staying three or four weeks with Mrs. Burgess,in hopes, as I tell her, to fall in with the Doctor again.
And I must say that Lucy's crossness not to take themalong with them in the chaise is worse than all.
Poor Mr. Edward!
I cannot get him out of my head, but youmust send for him to Barton, and Miss Marianne must try tocomfort him."
Mr. Dashwood's strains were more solemn.
Mrs. Ferrars was the most unfortunate of women--poorFanny had suffered agonies of sensibility--and heconsidered the existence of each, under such a blow,with grateful wonder.
Robert's offence was unpardonable,but Lucy's was infinitely worse.
Neither of them wereever again to be mentioned to Mrs. Ferrars; and even,if she might hereafter be induced to forgive her son,his wife should never be acknowledged as her daughter,nor be permitted to appear in her presence.
The secrecywith which everything had been carried on between them,was rationally treated as enormously heighteningthe crime, because, had any suspicion of it occurredto the others, proper measures would have been takento prevent the marriage; and he called on Elinor to joinwith him in regretting that Lucy's engagement with Edwardhad not rather been fulfilled, than that she should thusbe the means of spreading misery farther in the family.--He thus continued:"Mrs. Ferrars has never yet mentioned Edward's name,which does not surprise us; but, to our great astonishment,not a line has been received from him on the occasion.
Perhaps, however, he is kept silent by his fear of offending,and I shall, therefore, give him a hint, by a lineto Oxford, that his sister and I both think a letterof proper submission from him, addressed perhaps to Fanny,and by her shewn to her mother, might not be taken amiss;for we all know the tenderness of Mrs. Ferrars's heart,and that she wishes for nothing so much as to be on good termswith her children."
This paragraph was of some importance to theprospects and conduct of Edward.
It determined himto attempt a reconciliation, though not exactlyin the manner pointed out by their brother and sister.
"A letter of proper submission!"
repeated he;"would they have me beg my mother's pardon for Robert'singratitude to HER, and breach of honour to ME?--I canmake no submission--I am grown neither humble norpenitent by what has passed.--I am grown very happy;but that would not interest.--I know of no submissionthat IS proper for me to make."
"You may certainly ask to be forgiven," said Elinor,"because you have offended;--and I should think youmight NOW venture so far as to profess some concernfor having ever formed the engagement which drew on youyour mother's anger."
He agreed that he might.
"And when she has forgiven you, perhaps a little humilitymay be convenient while acknowledging a second engagement,almost as imprudent in HER eyes as the first."
He had nothing to urge against it, but stillresisted the idea of a letter of proper submission;and therefore, to make it easier to him, as he declareda much greater willingness to make mean concessionsby word of mouth than on paper, it was resolved that,instead of writing to Fanny, he should go to London,and personally intreat her good offices in his favour.--"And if they really DO interest themselves," said Marianne,in her new character of candour, "in bringing abouta reconciliation, I shall think that even John and Fannyare not entirely without merit."
After a visit on Colonel Brandon's side of only threeor four days, the two gentlemen quitted Barton together.--They were to go immediately to Delaford, that Edwardmight have some personal knowledge of his future home,and assist his patron and friend in deciding on whatimprovements were needed to it; and from thence,after staying there a couple of nights, he was to proceedon his journey to town.
CHAPTER 50After a proper resistance on the part of Mrs. Ferrars,just so violent and so steady as to preserve her from thatreproach which she always seemed fearful of incurring,the reproach of being too amiable, Edward was admittedto her presence, and pronounced to be again her son.
Her family had of late been exceedingly fluctuating.
For many years of her life she had had two sons;but the crime and annihilation of Edward a few weeks ago,had robbed her of one; the similar annihilation of Roberthad left her for a fortnight without any; and now,by the resuscitation of Edward, she had one again.
In spite of his being allowed once more to live,however, he did not feel the continuance of his existencesecure, till he had revealed his present engagement;for the publication of that circumstance, he feared,might give a sudden turn to his constitution, and carryhim off as rapidly as before.
With apprehensive cautiontherefore it was revealed, and he was listened to withunexpected calmness.
Mrs. Ferrars at first reasonablyendeavoured to dissuade him from marrying Miss Dashwood,by every argument in her power;--told him, that in Miss Mortonhe would have a woman of higher rank and larger fortune;--and enforced the assertion, by observing that Miss Mortonwas the daughter of a nobleman with thirty thousand pounds,while Miss Dashwood was only the daughter of a privategentleman with no more than THREE; but when she found that,though perfectly admitting the truth of her representation,he was by no means inclined to be guided by it,she judged it wisest, from the experience of the past,to submit--and therefore, after such an ungracious delayas she owed to her own dignity, and as served to preventevery suspicion of good-will, she issued her decreeof consent to the marriage of Edward and Elinor.
What she would engage to do towards augmentingtheir income was next to be considered; and here itplainly appeared, that though Edward was now her only son,he was by no means her eldest; for while Robert wasinevitably endowed with a thousand pounds a-year,not the smallest objection was made against Edward's takingorders for the sake of two hundred and fifty at the utmost;nor was anything promised either for the present or in future,beyond the ten thousand pounds, which had been given with Fanny.
It was as much, however, as was desired,and more than was expected, by Edward and Elinor;and Mrs. Ferrars herself, by her shuffling excuses,seemed the only person surprised at her not giving more.
With an income quite sufficient to their wantsthus secured to them, they had nothing to wait forafter Edward was in possession of the living, but thereadiness of the house, to which Colonel Brandon,with an eager desire for the accommodation of Elinor,was making considerable improvements; and after waitingsome time for their completion, after experiencing,as usual, a thousand disappointments and delaysfrom the unaccountable dilatoriness of the workmen, Elinor,as usual, broke through the first positive resolutionof not marrying till every thing was ready, and theceremony took place in Barton church early in the autumn.
The first month after their marriage was spentwith their friend at the Mansion-house; from whencethey could superintend the progress of the Parsonage,and direct every thing as they liked on the spot;--could chuse papers, project shrubberies, and invent a sweep.
Mrs. Jennings's prophecies, though rather jumbled together,were chiefly fulfilled; for she was able to visit Edwardand his wife in their Parsonage by Michaelmas, and shefound in Elinor and her husband, as she really believed,one of the happiest couples in the world.
They hadin fact nothing to wish for, but the marriage of ColonelBrandon and Marianne, and rather better pasturage fortheir cows.
They were visited on their first settling by almostall their relations and friends.
Mrs. Ferrars cameto inspect the happiness which she was almost ashamedof having authorised; and even the Dashwoods were atthe expense of a journey from Sussex to do them honour.
"I will not say that I am disappointed, my dear sister,"said John, as they were walking together one morning beforethe gates of Delaford House, "THAT would be saying too much,for certainly you have been one of the most fortunate youngwomen in the world, as it is.
But, I confess, it wouldgive me great pleasure to call Colonel Brandon brother.
His property here, his place, his house, every thing is insuch respectable and excellent condition!--and his woods!--Ihave not seen such timber any where in Dorsetshire, as thereis now standing in Delaford Hanger!--And though, perhaps,Marianne may not seem exactly the person to attract him--yet I think it would altogether be advisable for you tohave them now frequently staying with you, for as ColonelBrandon seems a great deal at home, nobody can tell whatmay happen--for, when people are much thrown together,and see little of anybody else--and it will always bein your power to set her off to advantage, and so forth;--in short, you may as well give her a chance--You understandme."
--But though Mrs. Ferrars DID come to see them, and alwaystreated them with the make-believe of decent affection,they were never insulted by her real favour and preference.
THAT was due to the folly of Robert, and the cunningof his wife; and it was earned by them before many monthshad passed away.
The selfish sagacity of the latter,which had at first drawn Robert into the scrape,was the principal instrument of his deliverance from it;for her respectful humility, assiduous attentions,and endless flatteries, as soon as the smallest openingwas given for their exercise, reconciled Mrs. Ferrarsto his choice, and re-established him completely inher favour.
The whole of Lucy's behaviour in the affair,and the prosperity which crowned it, therefore, may be heldforth as a most encouraging instance of what an earnest,an unceasing attention to self-interest, however its progressmay be apparently obstructed, will do in securing everyadvantage of fortune, with no other sacrifice than that of timeand conscience.
When Robert first sought her acquaintance,and privately visited her in Bartlett's Buildings,it was only with the view imputed to him by his brother.
He merely meant to persuade her to give up the engagement;and as there could be nothing to overcome but the affectionof both, he naturally expected that one or two interviewswould settle the matter.
In that point, however,and that only, he erred;--for though Lucy soon gave himhopes that his eloquence would convince her in TIME,another visit, another conversation, was always wantedto produce this conviction.
Some doubts always lingeredin her mind when they parted, which could only beremoved by another half hour's discourse with himself.
His attendance was by this means secured, and the restfollowed in course.
Instead of talking of Edward,they came gradually to talk only of Robert,--a subjecton which he had always more to say than on any other,and in which she soon betrayed an interest even equalto his own; and in short, it became speedily evidentto both, that he had entirely supplanted his brother.
He was proud of his conquest, proud of tricking Edward,and very proud of marrying privately without hismother's consent.
What immediately followed is known.
They passed some months in great happiness at Dawlish;for she had many relations and old acquaintances tocut--and he drew several plans for magnificent cottages;--and from thence returning to town, procured the forgivenessof Mrs. Ferrars, by the simple expedient of asking it,which, at Lucy's instigation, was adopted.
The forgiveness,at first, indeed, as was reasonable, comprehended only Robert;and Lucy, who had owed his mother no duty and thereforecould have transgressed none, still remained some weekslonger unpardoned.
But perseverance in humility of conductand messages, in self-condemnation for Robert's offence,and gratitude for the unkindness she was treated with,procured her in time the haughty notice which overcameher by its graciousness, and led soon afterwards, by rapiddegrees, to the highest state of affection and influence.
Lucy became as necessary to Mrs. Ferrars, as either Robertor Fanny; and while Edward was never cordially forgivenfor having once intended to marry her, and Elinor,though superior to her in fortune and birth, was spokenof as an intruder, SHE was in every thing considered,and always openly acknowledged, to be a favourite child.
They settled in town, received very liberal assistancefrom Mrs. Ferrars, were on the best terms imaginablewith the Dashwoods; and setting aside the jealousiesand ill-will continually subsisting between Fanny and Lucy,in which their husbands of course took a part, as wellas the frequent domestic disagreements between Robert andLucy themselves, nothing could exceed the harmony in whichthey all lived together.
What Edward had done to forfeit the right of eldestson, might have puzzled many people to find out; and whatRobert had done to succeed to it, might have puzzled themstill more.
It was an arrangement, however, justified inits effects, if not in its cause; for nothing everappeared in Robert's style of living or of talking to givea suspicion of his regretting the extent of his income,as either leaving his brother too little, or bringinghimself too much;--and if Edward might be judged fromthe ready discharge of his duties in every particular,from an increasing attachment to his wife and his home,and from the regular cheerfulness of his spirits,he might be supposed no less contented with his lot,no less free from every wish of an exchange.
Elinor's marriage divided her as little from herfamily as could well be contrived, without renderingthe cottage at Barton entirely useless, for her motherand sisters spent much more than half their time with her.
Mrs. Dashwood was acting on motives of policy as wellas pleasure in the frequency of her visits at Delaford;for her wish of bringing Marianne and Colonel Brandon togetherwas hardly less earnest, though rather more liberal thanwhat John had expressed.
It was now her darling object.
Precious as was the company of her daughter to her,she desired nothing so much as to give up its constantenjoyment to her valued friend; and to see Marianne settled atthe mansion-house was equally the wish of Edward and Elinor.
They each felt his sorrows, and their own obligations,and Marianne, by general consent, was to be the rewardof all.
With such a confederacy against her--with a knowledgeso intimate of his goodness--with a conviction of his fondattachment to herself, which at last, though long after itwas observable to everybody else--burst on her--what could shedo?
Marianne Dashwood was born to an extraordinary fate.
She was born to discover the falsehood of her own opinions,and to counteract, by her conduct, her most favourite maxims.
She was born to overcome an affection formed so latein life as at seventeen, and with no sentimentsuperior to strong esteem and lively friendship,voluntarily to give her hand to another!--and THAT other,a man who had suffered no less than herself under theevent of a former attachment, whom, two years before,she had considered too old to be married,--and who stillsought the constitutional safeguard of a flannel waistcoat!
But so it was.
Instead of falling a sacrificeto an irresistible passion, as once she had fondlyflattered herself with expecting,--instead of remainingeven for ever with her mother, and finding her onlypleasures in retirement and study, as afterwards in hermore calm and sober judgment she had determined on,--she found herself at nineteen, submitting to new attachments,entering on new duties, placed in a new home, a wife,the mistress of a family, and the patroness of a village.
Colonel Brandon was now as happy, as all those who bestloved him, believed he deserved to be;--in Marianne hewas consoled for every past affliction;--her regard and hersociety restored his mind to animation, and his spiritsto cheerfulness; and that Marianne found her own happinessin forming his, was equally the persuasion and delightof each observing friend.
Marianne could never loveby halves; and her whole heart became, in time, as muchdevoted to her husband, as it had once been to Willoughby.
Willoughby could not hear of her marriage withouta pang; and his punishment was soon afterwards completein the voluntary forgiveness of Mrs. Smith, who, by statinghis marriage with a woman of character, as the sourceof her clemency, gave him reason for believing that had hebehaved with honour towards Marianne, he might at once havebeen happy and rich.
That his repentance of misconduct,which thus brought its own punishment, was sincere,need not be doubted;--nor that he long thought of ColonelBrandon with envy, and of Marianne with regret.
But thathe was for ever inconsolable, that he fled from society,or contracted an habitual gloom of temper, or died of abroken heart, must not be depended on--for he did neither.
He lived to exert, and frequently to enjoy himself.
His wife was not always out of humour, nor his homealways uncomfortable; and in his breed of horses and dogs,and in sporting of every kind, he found no inconsiderabledegree of domestic felicity.
For Marianne, however--in spite of his incivilityin surviving her loss--he always retained that decidedregard which interested him in every thing that befell her,and made her his secret standard of perfection in woman;--and many a rising beauty would be slighted by him inafter-days as bearing no comparison with Mrs. Brandon.
Mrs. Dashwood was prudent enough to remain at the cottage,without attempting a removal to Delaford; and fortunately forSir John and Mrs. Jennings, when Marianne was taken from them,Margaret had reached an age highly suitable for dancing,and not very ineligible for being supposed to have a lover.
Between Barton and Delaford, there was that constantcommunication which strong family affection wouldnaturally dictate;--and among the merits and the happinessof Elinor and Marianne, let it not be ranked as the leastconsiderable, that though sisters, and living almost withinsight of each other, they could live without disagreementbetween themselves, or producing coolness between their husbands.
THE END
