[The Man Who Was Thursday by G. K. Chesterton 1908]To Edmund Clerihew BentleyA cloud was on the mind of men, and wailing went the weather,Yea, a sick cloud upon the soul when we were boys together.
Science announced nonentity and art admired decay;The world was old and ended: but you and I were gay;Round us in antic order their crippled vices came--Lust that had lost its laughter, fear that had lost its shame.
Like the white lock of Whistler, that lit our aimless gloom,Men showed their own white feather as proudly as a plume.
Life was a fly that faded, and death a drone that stung;The world was very old indeed when you and I were young.
They twisted even decent sin to shapes not to be named:Men were ashamed of honour; but we were not ashamed.
Weak if we were and foolish, not thus we failed, not thus;When that black Baal blocked the heavens he had no hymns from usChildren we were--our forts of sand were even as weak as eve,High as they went we piled them up to break that bitter sea.
Fools as we were in motley, all jangling and absurd,When all church bells were silent our cap and beds were heard.
Not all unhelped we held the fort, our tiny flags unfurled;Some giants laboured in that cloud to lift it from the world.
I find again the book we found, I feel the hour that flingsFar out of fish-shaped Paumanok some cry of cleaner things;And the Green Carnation withered, as in forest fires that pass,Roared in the wind of all the world ten million leaves of grass;Or sane and sweet and sudden as a bird sings in the rain--Truth out of Tusitala spoke and pleasure out of pain.
Yea, cool and clear and sudden as a bird sings in the grey,Dunedin to Samoa spoke, and darkness unto day.
But we were young; we lived to see God break their bitter charms.
God and the good Republic come riding back in arms:We have seen the City of Mansoul, even as it rocked, relieved--Blessed are they who did not see, but being blind, believed.
This is a tale of those old fears, even of those emptied hells,And none but you shall understand the true thing that it tells--Of what colossal gods of shame could cow men and yet crash,Of what huge devils hid the stars, yet fell at a pistol flash.
The doubts that were so plain to chase, so dreadful to withstand--Oh, who shall understand but you; yea, who shall understand?
The doubts that drove us through the night as we two talked amain,And day had broken on the streets e'er it broke upon the brain.
Between us, by the peace of God, such truth can now be told;Yea, there is strength in striking root and good in growing old.
We have found common things at last and marriage and a creed,And I may safely write it now, and you may safely read.
G. K. C.CHAPTER ITHE TWO POETS OF SAFFRON PARKTHE suburb of Saffron Park lay on the sunset side of London, asred and ragged as a cloud of sunset.
It was built of a brightbrick throughout; its sky-line was fantastic, and even its groundplan was wild.
It had been the outburst of a speculative builder,faintly tinged with art, who called its architecture sometimesElizabethan and sometimes Queen Anne, apparently under theimpression that the two sovereigns were identical.
It was describedwith some justice as an artistic colony, though it never in anydefinable way produced any art.
But although its pretensions to bean intellectual centre were a little vague, its pretensions to be apleasant place were quite indisputable.
The stranger who looked forthe first time at the quaint red houses could only think how veryoddly shaped the people must be who could fit in to them.
Nor whenhe met the people was he disappointed in this respect.
The placewas not only pleasant, but perfect, if once he could regard it notas a deception but rather as a dream.
Even if the people were not"artists," the whole was nevertheless artistic.
That young man withthe long, auburn hair and the impudent face--that young man was notreally a poet; but surely he was a poem.
That old gentleman withthe wild, white beard and the wild, white hat--that venerablehumbug was not really a philosopher; but at least he was the causeof philosophy in others.
That scientific gentleman with the bald,egg-like head and the bare, bird-like neck had no real right to theairs of science that he assumed.
He had not discovered anything newin biology; but what biological creature could he have discoveredmore singular than himself?
Thus, and thus only, the whole placehad properly to be regarded; it had to be considered not so muchas a workshop for artists, but as a frail but finished work of art.
A man who stepped into its social atmosphere felt as if he hadstepped into a written comedy.
More especially this attractive unreality fell upon it aboutnightfall, when the extravagant roofs were dark against theafterglow and the whole insane village seemed as separate as adrifting cloud.
This again was more strongly true of the manynights of local festivity, when the little gardens were oftenilluminated, and the big Chinese lanterns glowed in the dwarfishtrees like some fierce and monstrous fruit.
And this was strongestof all on one particular evening, still vaguely remembered in thelocality, of which the auburn-haired poet was the hero.
It was notby any means the only evening of which he was the hero.
On manynights those passing by his little back garden might hear his high,didactic voice laying down the law to men and particularly towomen.
The attitude of women in such cases was indeed one of theparadoxes of the place.
Most of the women were of the kind vaguelycalled emancipated, and professed some protest against malesupremacy.
Yet these new women would always pay to a man theextravagant compliment which no ordinary woman ever pays to him,that of listening while he is talking.
And Mr. Lucian Gregory, thered-haired poet, was really (in some sense) a man worth listeningto, even if one only laughed at the end of it.
He put the old cantof the lawlessness of art and the art of lawlessness with a certainimpudent freshness which gave at least a momentary pleasure.
He washelped in some degree by the arresting oddity of his appearance,which he worked, as the phrase goes, for all it was worth.
His darkred hair parted in the middle was literally like a woman's, andcurved into the slow curls of a virgin in a pre-Raphaelite picture.
From within this almost saintly oval, however, his face projectedsuddenly broad and brutal, the chin carried forward with a look ofcockney contempt.
This combination at once tickled and terrifiedthe nerves of a neurotic population.
He seemed like a walkingblasphemy, a blend of the angel and the ape.
This particular evening, if it is remembered for nothing else,will be remembered in that place for its strange sunset.
It lookedlike the end of the world.
All the heaven seemed covered with aquite vivid and palpable plumage; you could only say that the skywas full of feathers, and of feathers that almost brushed theface.
Across the great part of the dome they were grey, with thestrangest tints of violet and mauve and an unnatural pink or palegreen; but towards the west the whole grew past description,transparent and passionate, and the last red-hot plumes of itcovered up the sun like something too good to be seen.
The wholewas so close about the earth, as to express nothing but a violentsecrecy.
The very empyrean seemed to be a secret.
It expressedthat splendid smallness which is the soul of local patriotism.
Thevery sky seemed small.
I say that there are some inhabitants who may remember the eveningif only by that oppressive sky.
There are others who may rememberit because it marked the first appearance in the place of thesecond poet of Saffron Park.
For a long time the red-hairedrevolutionary had reigned without a rival; it was upon the nightof the sunset that his solitude suddenly ended.
The new poet, whointroduced himself by the name of Gabriel Syme was a verymild-looking mortal, with a fair, pointed beard and faint, yellowhair.
But an impression grew that he was less meek than he looked.
He signalised his entrance by differing with the established poet,Gregory, upon the whole nature of poetry.
He said that he (Syme)was poet of law, a poet of order; nay, he said he was a poet ofrespectability.
So all the Saffron Parkers looked at him as if hehad that moment fallen out of that impossible sky.
In fact, Mr. Lucian Gregory, the anarchic poet, connected the twoevents.
"It may well be," he said, in his sudden lyrical manner, "it maywell be on such a night of clouds and cruel colours that there isbrought forth upon the earth such a portent as a respectable poet.
You say you are a poet of law; I say you are a contradiction interms.
I only wonder there were not comets and earthquakes on thenight you appeared in this garden."
The man with the meek blue eyes and the pale, pointed beard enduredthese thunders with a certain submissive solemnity.
The third partyof the group, Gregory's sister Rosamond, who had her brother'sbraids of red hair, but a kindlier face underneath them, laughedwith such mixture of admiration and disapproval as she gavecommonly to the family oracle.
Gregory resumed in high oratorical good humour.
"An artist is identical with an anarchist," he cried.
"You mighttranspose the words anywhere.
An anarchist is an artist.
The manwho throws a bomb is an artist, because he prefers a great momentto everything.
He sees how much more valuable is one burst ofblazing light, one peal of perfect thunder, than the mere commonbodies of a few shapeless policemen.
An artist disregards allgovernments, abolishes all conventions.
The poet delights indisorder only.
If it were not so, the most poetical thing in theworld would be the Underground Railway."
"So it is," said Mr. Syme.
"Nonsense!"
said Gregory, who was very rational when anyone elseattempted paradox.
"Why do all the clerks and navvies in therailway trains look so sad and tired, so very sad and tired?
I willtell you.
It is because they know that the train is going right.
Itis because they know that whatever place they have taken a ticketfor that place they will reach.
It is because after they havepassed Sloane Square they know that the next station must beVictoria, and nothing but Victoria.
Oh, their wild rapture!
oh,their eyes like stars and their souls again in Eden, if the nextstation were unaccountably Baker Street!"
"It is you who are unpoetical," replied the poet Syme.
"If what yousay of clerks is true, they can only be as prosaic as your poetry.
The rare, strange thing is to hit the mark; the gross, obviousthing is to miss it.
We feel it is epical when man with one wildarrow strikes a distant bird.
Is it not also epical when man withone wild engine strikes a distant station?
Chaos is dull; becausein chaos the train might indeed go anywhere, to Baker Street or toBagdad.
But man is a magician, and his whole magic is in this, thathe does say Victoria, and lo!
it is Victoria.
No, take your booksof mere poetry and prose; let me read a time table, with tears ofpride.
Take your Byron, who commemorates the defeats of man; giveme Bradshaw, who commemorates his victories.
Give me Bradshaw, Isay!"
"Must you go?"
inquired Gregory sarcastically.
"I tell you," went on Syme with passion, "that every time a traincomes in I feel that it has broken past batteries of besiegers, andthat man has won a battle against chaos.
You say contemptuouslythat when one has left Sloane Square one must come to Victoria.
Isay that one might do a thousand things instead, and that wheneverI really come there I have the sense of hairbreadth escape.
Andwhen I hear the guard shout out the word 'Victoria,' it is not anunmeaning word.
It is to me the cry of a herald announcingconquest.
It is to me indeed 'Victoria'; it is the victory ofAdam."
Gregory wagged his heavy, red head with a slow and sad smile.
"And even then," he said, "we poets always ask the question, 'Andwhat is Victoria now that you have got there ?'
You think Victoriais like the New Jerusalem.
We know that the New Jerusalem will onlybe like Victoria.
Yes, the poet will be discontented even in thestreets of heaven.
The poet is always in revolt."
"There again," said Syme irritably, "what is there poetical aboutbeing in revolt ?
You might as well say that it is poetical to besea-sick.
Being sick is a revolt.
Both being sick and beingrebellious may be the wholesome thing on certain desperateoccasions; but I'm hanged if I can see why they are poetical.
Revolt in the abstract is--revolting.
It's mere vomiting."
The girl winced for a flash at the unpleasant word, but Syme wastoo hot to heed her.
"It is things going right," he cried, "that is poetical I Ourdigestions, for instance, going sacredly and silently right, thatis the foundation of all poetry.
Yes, the most poetical thing, morepoetical than the flowers, more poetical than the stars--the mostpoetical thing in the world is not being sick."
"Really," said Gregory superciliously, "the examples you choose--""I beg your pardon," said Syme grimly, "I forgot we had abolishedall conventions."
For the first time a red patch appeared on Gregory's forehead.
"You don't expect me," he said, "to revolutionise society on thislawn ?"
Syme looked straight into his eyes and smiled sweetly.
"No, I don't," he said; "but I suppose that if you were seriousabout your anarchism, that is exactly what you would do."
Gregory's big bull's eyes blinked suddenly like those of an angrylion, and one could almost fancy that his red mane rose.
"Don't you think, then," he said in a dangerous voice, "that I amserious about my anarchism?"
"I beg your pardon ?"
said Syme.
"Am I not serious about my anarchism ?"
cried Gregory, with knottedfists.
"My dear fellow!"
said Syme, and strolled away.
With surprise, but with a curious pleasure, he found RosamondGregory still in his company.
"Mr. Syme," she said, "do the people who talk like you and mybrother often mean what they say ?
Do you mean what you say now ?"
Syme smiled.
"Do you ?"
he asked.
"What do you mean ?"
asked the girl, with grave eyes.
"My dear Miss Gregory," said Syme gently, "there are many kinds ofsincerity and insincerity.
When you say 'thank you' for the salt,do you mean what you say ?
No.
When you say 'the world is round,'do you mean what you say ?
No.
It is true, but you don't mean it.
Now, sometimes a man like your brother really finds a thing he doesmean.
It may be only a half-truth, quarter-truth, tenth-truth; butthen he says more than he means--from sheer force of meaning it."
She was looking at him from under level brows; her face was graveand open, and there had fallen upon it the shadow of thatunreasoning responsibility which is at the bottom of the mostfrivolous woman, the maternal watch which is as old as the world.
"Is he really an anarchist, then?"
she asked.
"Only in that sense I speak of," replied Syme; "or if you preferit, in that nonsense."
She drew her broad brows together and said abruptly--"He wouldn't really use--bombs or that sort of thing?"
Syme broke into a great laugh, that seemed too large for his slightand somewhat dandified figure.
"Good Lord, no!"
he said, "that has to be done anonymously."
And at that the corners of her own mouth broke into a smile, andshe thought with a simultaneous pleasure of Gregory's absurdityand of his safety.
Syme strolled with her to a seat in the corner of the garden, andcontinued to pour out his opinions.
For he was a sincere man, andin spite of his superficial airs and graces, at root a humble one.
And it is always the humble man who talks too much; the proud manwatches himself too closely.
He defended respectability withviolence and exaggeration.
He grew passionate in his praise oftidiness and propriety.
All the time there was a smell of lilacall round him.
Once he heard very faintly in some distant street abarrel-organ begin to play, and it seemed to him that his heroicwords were moving to a tiny tune from under or beyond the world.
He stared and talked at the girl's red hair and amused face forwhat seemed to be a few minutes; and then, feeling that the groupsin such a place should mix, rose to his feet.
To his astonishment,he discovered the whole garden empty.
Everyone had gone long ago,and he went himself with a rather hurried apology.
He left with asense of champagne in his head, which he could not afterwardsexplain.
In the wild events which were to follow this girl had nopart at all; he never saw her again until all his tale was over.
And yet, in some indescribable way, she kept recurring like amotive in music through all his mad adventures afterwards, and theglory of her strange hair ran like a red thread through those darkand ill-drawn tapestries of the night.
For what followed was soimprobable, that it might well have been a dream.
When Syme went out into the starlit street, he found it for themoment empty.
Then he realised (in some odd way) that the silencewas rather a living silence than a dead one.
Directly outside thedoor stood a street lamp, whose gleam gilded the leaves of the treethat bent out over the fence behind him.
About a foot from thelamp-post stood a figure almost as rigid and motionless as thelamp-post itself.
The tall hat and long frock coat were black; theface, in an abrupt shadow, was almost as dark.
Only a fringe offiery hair against the light, and also something aggressive in theattitude, proclaimed that it was the poet Gregory.
He had somethingof the look of a masked bravo waiting sword in hand for his foe.
He made a sort of doubtful salute, which Syme somewhat moreformally returned.
"I was waiting for you," said Gregory.
"Might I have a moment'sconversation?"
"Certainly.
About what?"
asked Syme in a sort of weak wonder.
Gregory struck out with his stick at the lamp-post, and then at thetree.
"About this and this," he cried; "about order and anarchy.
There is your precious order, that lean, iron lamp, ugly andbarren; and there is anarchy, rich, living, reproducingitself--there is anarchy, splendid in green and gold."
"All the same," replied Syme patiently, "just at present you onlysee the tree by the light of the lamp.
I wonder when you would eversee the lamp by the light of the tree."
Then after a pause he said,"But may I ask if you have been standing out here in the dark onlyto resume our little argument?"
"No," cried out Gregory, in a voice that rang down the street, "Idid not stand here to resume our argument, but to end it for ever."
The silence fell again, and Syme, though he understood nothing,listened instinctively for something serious.
Gregory began in asmooth voice and with a rather bewildering smile.
"Mr. Syme," he said, "this evening you succeeded in doing somethingrather remarkable.
You did something to me that no man born ofwoman has ever succeeded in doing before."
"Indeed!"
"Now I remember," resumed Gregory reflectively, "one other personsucceeded in doing it.
The captain of a penny steamer (if Iremember correctly) at Southend.
You have irritated me."
"I am very sorry," replied Syme with gravity.
"I am afraid my fury and your insult are too shocking to be wipedout even with an apology," said Gregory very calmly.
"No duelcould wipe it out.
If I struck you dead I could not wipe it out.
There is only one way by which that insult can be erased, and thatway I choose.
I am going, at the possible sacrifice of my life andhonour, to prove to you that you were wrong in what you said."
"In what I said?"
"You said I was not serious about being an anarchist."
"There are degrees of seriousness," replied Syme.
"I have neverdoubted that you were perfectly sincere in this sense, that youthought what you said well worth saying, that you thought aparadox might wake men up to a neglected truth."
Gregory stared at him steadily and painfully.
"And in no other sense," he asked, "you think me serious?
You thinkme a flaneur who lets fall occasional truths.
You do not think thatin a deeper, a more deadly sense, I am serious."
Syme struck his stick violently on the stones of the road.
"Serious!"
he cried.
"Good Lord!
is this street serious?
Are thesedamned Chinese lanterns serious?
Is the whole caboodle serious?
One comes here and talks a pack of bosh, and perhaps some sense aswell, but I should think very little of a man who didn't keepsomething in the background of his life that was more serious thanall this talking--something more serious, whether it was religionor only drink."
"Very well," said Gregory, his face darkening, "you shall seesomething more serious than either drink or religion."
Syme stood waiting with his usual air of mildness until Gregoryagain opened his lips.
"You spoke just now of having a religion.
Is it really true thatyou have one?"
"Oh," said Syme with a beaming smile, "we are all Catholics now."
"Then may I ask you to swear by whatever gods or saints yourreligion involves that you will not reveal what I am now going totell you to any son of Adam, and especially not to the police?
Will you swear that!
If you will take upon yourself this awfulabnegations if you will consent to burden your soul with a vowthat you should never make and a knowledge you should never dreamabout, I will promise you in return--""You will promise me in return?"
inquired Syme, as the otherpaused.
"I will promise you a very entertaining evening."
Syme suddenlytook off his hat.
"Your offer," he said, "is far too idiotic to be declined.
You saythat a poet is always an anarchist.
I disagree; but I hope at leastthat he is always a sportsman.
Permit me, here and now, to swear asa Christian, and promise as a good comrade and a fellow-artist,that I will not report anything of this, whatever it is, to thepolice.
And now, in the name of Colney Hatch, what is it?"
"I think," said Gregory, with placid irrelevancy, "that we willcall a cab."
He gave two long whistles, and a hansom came rattling down theroad.
The two got into it in silence.
Gregory gave through thetrap the address of an obscure public-house on the Chiswick bankof the river.
The cab whisked itself away again, and in it thesetwo fantastics quitted their fantastic town.
CHAPTER IITHE SECRET OF GABRIEL SYMETHE cab pulled up before a particularly dreary and greasy beershop,into which Gregory rapidly conducted his companion.
They seatedthemselves in a close and dim sort of bar-parlour, at a stainedwooden table with one wooden leg.
The room was so small and dark,that very little could be seen of the attendant who was summoned,beyond a vague and dark impression of something bulky and bearded.
"Will you take a little supper?"
asked Gregory politely.
"The patede foie gras is not good here, but I can recommend the game."
Syme received the remark with stolidity, imagining it to be a joke.
Accepting the vein of humour, he said, with a well-bredindifference--"Oh, bring me some lobster mayonnaise."
To his indescribable astonishment, the man only said "Certainly,sir!"
and went away apparently to get it.
"What will you drink?"
resumed Gregory, with the same careless yetapologetic air.
"I shall only have a crepe de menthe myself; I havedined.
But the champagne can really be trusted.
Do let me start youwith a half-bottle of Pommery at least?"
"Thank you!"
said the motionless Syme.
"You are very good."
His further attempts at conversation, somewhat disorganised inthemselves, were cut short finally as by a thunderbolt by theactual appearance of the lobster.
Syme tasted it, and found itparticularly good.
Then he suddenly began to eat with greatrapidity and appetite.
"Excuse me if I enjoy myself rather obviously!"
he said to Gregory,smiling.
"I don't often have the luck to have a dream like this.
Itis new to me for a nightmare to lead to a lobster.
It is commonlythe other way."
"You are not asleep, I assure you," said Gregory.
"You are, on thecontrary, close to the most actual and rousing moment of yourexistence.
Ah, here comes your champagne!
I admit that there may bea slight disproportion, let us say, between the inner arrangementsof this excellent hotel and its simple and unpretentious exterior.
But that is all our modesty.
We are the most modest men that everlived on earth."
"And who are we?"
asked Syme, emptying his champagne glass.
"It is quite simple," replied Gregory.
"We are the seriousanarchists, in whom you do not believe."
"Oh!"
said Syme shortly.
"You do yourselves well in drinks."
"Yes, we are serious about everything," answered Gregory.
Then after a pause he added--"If in a few moments this table begins to turn round a little,don't put it down to your inroads into the champagne.
I don't wishyou to do yourself an injustice."
"Well, if I am not drunk, I am mad," replied Syme with perfectcalm; "but I trust I can behave like a gentleman in eithercondition.
May I smoke?"
"Certainly!"
said Gregory, producing a cigar-case.
"Try one ofmine."
Syme took the cigar, clipped the end off with a cigar-cutter outof his waistcoat pocket, put it in his mouth, lit it slowly, andlet out a long cloud of smoke.
It is not a little to his creditthat he performed these rites with so much composure, for almostbefore he had begun them the table at which he sat had begun torevolve, first slowly, and then rapidly, as if at an insaneseance.
"You must not mind it," said Gregory; "it's a kind of screw."
"Quite so," said Syme placidly, "a kind of screw.
How simple thatis!"
The next moment the smoke of his cigar, which had been waveringacross the room in snaky twists, went straight up as if from afactory chimney, and the two, with their chairs and table, shotdown through the floor as if the earth had swallowed them.
Theywent rattling down a kind of roaring chimney as rapidly as a liftcut loose, and they came with an abrupt bump to the bottom.
Butwhen Gregory threw open a pair of doors and let in a redsubterranean light, Syme was still smoking with one leg thrownover the other, and had not turned a yellow hair.
Gregory led him down a low, vaulted passage, at the end of whichwas the red light.
It was an enormous crimson lantern, nearly asbig as a fireplace, fixed over a small but heavy iron door.
In thedoor there was a sort of hatchway or grating, and on this Gregorystruck five times.
A heavy voice with a foreign accent asked himwho he was.
To this he gave the more or less unexpected reply,"Mr. Joseph Chamberlain."
The heavy hinges began to move; it wasobviously some kind of password.
Inside the doorway the passage gleamed as if it were lined with anetwork of steel.
On a second glance, Syme saw that the glitteringpattern was really made up of ranks and ranks of rifles andrevolvers, closely packed or interlocked.
"I must ask you to forgive me all these formalities," said Gregory;"we have to be very strict here."
"Oh, don't apologise," said Syme.
"I know your passion for law andorder," and he stepped into the passage lined with the steelweapons.
With his long, fair hair and rather foppish frock-coat, helooked a singularly frail and fanciful figure as he walked downthat shining avenue of death.
They passed through several such passages, and came out at lastinto a queer steel chamber with curved walls, almost spherical inshape, but presenting, with its tiers of benches, something of theappearance of a scientific lecture-theatre.
There were no rifles orpistols in this apartment, but round the walls of it were hung moredubious and dreadful shapes, things that looked like the bulbs ofiron plants, or the eggs of iron birds.
They were bombs, and thevery room itself seemed like the inside of a bomb.
Syme knocked hiscigar ash off against the wall, and went in.
"And now, my dear Mr. Syme," said Gregory, throwing himself in anexpansive manner on the bench under the largest bomb, "now we arequite cosy, so let us talk properly.
Now no human words can giveyou any notion of why I brought you here.
It was one of those quitearbitrary emotions, like jumping off a cliff or falling in love.
Suffice it to say that you were an inexpressibly irritating fellow,and, to do you justice, you are still.
I would break twenty oathsof secrecy for the pleasure of taking you down a peg.
That way youhave of lighting a cigar would make a priest break the seal ofconfession.
Well, you said that you were quite certain I was not aserious anarchist.
Does this place strike you as being serious?"
"It does seem to have a moral under all its gaiety," assentedSyme; "but may I ask you two questions?
You need not fear to giveme information, because, as you remember, you very wisely extortedfrom me a promise not to tell the police, a promise I shallcertainly keep.
So it is in mere curiosity that I make my queries.
First of all, what is it really all about?
What is it you objectto?
You want to abolish Government?"
"To abolish God!"
said Gregory, opening the eyes of a fanatic.
"Wedo not only want to upset a few despotisms and police regulations;that sort of anarchism does exist, but it is a mere branch of theNonconformists.
We dig deeper and we blow you higher.
We wish todeny all those arbitrary distinctions of vice and virtue, honourand treachery, upon which mere rebels base themselves.
The sillysentimentalists of the French Revolution talked of the Rights ofMan!
We hate Rights as we hate Wrongs.
We have abolished Right andWrong."
"And Right and Left," said Syme with a simple eagerness, "I hopeyou will abolish them too.
They are much more troublesome to me."
"You spoke of a second question," snapped Gregory.
"With pleasure," resumed Syme.
"In all your present acts andsurroundings there is a scientific attempt at secrecy.
I have anaunt who lived over a shop, but this is the first time I havefound people living from preference under a public-house.
You havea heavy iron door.
You cannot pass it without submitting to thehumiliation of calling yourself Mr. Chamberlain.
You surroundyourself with steel instruments which make the place, if I may sayso, more impressive than homelike.
May I ask why, after taking allthis trouble to barricade yourselves in the bowels of the earth,you then parade your whole secret by talking about anarchism toevery silly woman in Saffron Park?"
Gregory smiled.
"The answer is simple," he said.
"I told you I was a seriousanarchist, and you did not believe me.
Nor do they believe me.
Unless I took them into this infernal room they would not believeme."
Syme smoked thoughtfully, and looked at him with interest.
Gregorywent on.
"The history of the thing might amuse you," he said.
"When first Ibecame one of the New Anarchists I tried all kinds of respectabledisguises.
I dressed up as a bishop.
I read up all about bishopsin our anarchist pamphlets, in Superstition the Vampire andPriests of Prey.
I certainly understood from them that bishops arestrange and terrible old men keeping a cruel secret from mankind.
I was misinformed.
When on my first appearing in episcopal gaitersin a drawing-room I cried out in a voice of thunder, 'Down!
down!
presumptuous human reason!'
they found out in some way that I wasnot a bishop at all.
I was nabbed at once.
Then I made up as amillionaire; but I defended Capital with so much intelligence thata fool could see that I was quite poor.
Then I tried being amajor.
Now I am a humanitarian myself, but I have, I hope, enoughintellectual breadth to understand the position of those who, likeNietzsche, admire violence--the proud, mad war of Nature and allthat, you know.
I threw myself into the major.
I drew my sword andwaved it constantly.
I called out 'Blood!'
abstractedly, like aman calling for wine.
I often said, 'Let the weak perish; it isthe Law.'
Well, well, it seems majors don't do this.
I was nabbedagain.
At last I went in despair to the President of the CentralAnarchist Council, who is the greatest man in Europe."
"What is his name?"
asked Syme.
"You would not know it," answered Gregory.
"That is his greatness.
Caesar and Napoleon put all their genius into being heard of, andthey were heard of.
He puts all his genius into not being heard of,and he is not heard of.
But you cannot be for five minutes in theroom with him without feeling that Caesar and Napoleon would havebeen children in his hands."
He was silent and even pale for a moment, and then resumed--"But whenever he gives advice it is always something as startlingas an epigram, and yet as practical as the Bank of England.
I saidto him, 'What disguise will hide me from the world?
What can I findmore respectable than bishops and majors?'
He looked at me with hislarge but indecipherable face.
'You want a safe disguise, do you?
You want a dress which will guarantee you harmless; a dress inwhich no one would ever look for a bomb?'
I nodded.
He suddenlylifted his lion's voice.
'Why, then, dress up as an anarchist, youfool!'
he roared so that the room shook.
'Nobody will ever expectyou to do anything dangerous then.'
And he turned his broad backon me without another word.
I took his advice, and have neverregretted it.
I preached blood and murder to those women day andnight, and--by God!--they would let me wheel their perambulators."
Syme sat watching him with some respect in his large, blue eyes.
"You took me in," he said.
"It is really a smart dodge."
Then after a pause he added--"What do you call this tremendous President of yours?"
"We generally call him Sunday," replied Gregory with simplicity.
'You see, there are seven members of the Central AnarchistCouncil, and they are named after days of the week.
He is calledSunday, by some of his admirers Bloody Sunday.
It is curious youshould mention the matter, because the very night you have droppedin (if I may so express it) is the night on which our Londonbranch, which assembles in this room, has to elect its own deputyto fill a vacancy in the Council.
The gentleman who has for sometime past played, with propriety and general applause, thedifficult part of Thursday, has died quite suddenly.
Consequently,we have called a meeting this very evening to elect a successor."
He got to his feet and strolled across the room with a sort ofsmiling embarrassment.
"I feel somehow as if you were my mother, Syme," he continuedcasually.
"I feel that I can confide anything to you, as you havepromised to tell nobody.
In fact, I will confide to you somethingthat I would not say in so many words to the anarchists who will becoming to the room in about ten minutes.
We shall, of course, gothrough a form of election; but I don't mind telling you that it ispractically certain what the result will be."
He looked down for amoment modestly.
"It is almost a settled thing that I am to beThursday."
"My dear fellow."
said Syme heartily, "I congratulate you.
A greatcareer!"
Gregory smiled in deprecation, and walked across the room, talkingrapidly.
"As a matter of fact, everything is ready for me on this table," hesaid, "and the ceremony will probably be the shortest possible."
Syme also strolled across to the table, and found lying across it awalking-stick, which turned out on examination to be a sword-stick,a large Colt's revolver, a sandwich case, and a formidable flask ofbrandy.
Over the chair, beside the table, was thrown aheavy-looking cape or cloak.
"I have only to get the form of election finished," continuedGregory with animation, "then I snatch up this cloak and stick,stuff these other things into my pocket, step out of a door inthis cavern, which opens on the river, where there is a steam-tugalready waiting for me, and then--then--oh, the wild joy of beingThursday!"
And he clasped his hands.
Syme, who had sat down once more with his usual insolent languor,got to his feet with an unusual air of hesitation.
"Why is it," he asked vaguely, "that I think you are quite a decentfellow?
Why do I positively like you, Gregory?"
He paused a moment,and then added with a sort of fresh curiosity, "Is it because youare such an ass?"
There was a thoughtful silence again, and then he cried out--"Well, damn it all!
this is the funniest situation I have ever beenin in my life, and I am going to act accordingly.
Gregory, I gaveyou a promise before I came into this place.
That promise I wouldkeep under red-hot pincers.
Would you give me, for my own safety, alittle promise of the same kind? "
"A promise?"
asked Gregory, wondering.
"Yes," said Syme very seriously, "a promise.
I swore before Godthat I would not tell your secret to the police.
Will you swear byHumanity, or whatever beastly thing you believe in, that you willnot tell my secret to the anarchists?"
"Your secret?"
asked the staring Gregory.
"Have you got a secret?"
"Yes," said Syme, "I have a secret."
Then after a pause, "Will youswear?"
Gregory glared at him gravely for a few moments, and then saidabruptly--"You must have bewitched me, but I feel a furious curiosity aboutyou.
Yes, I will swear not to tell the anarchists anything you tellme.
But look sharp, for they will be here in a couple of minutes."
Syme rose slowly to his feet and thrust his long, white hands intohis long, grey trousers' pockets.
Almost as he did so there camefive knocks on the outer grating, proclaiming the arrival of thefirst of the conspirators.
"Well," said Syme slowly, "I don't know how to tell you the truthmore shortly than by saying that your expedient of dressing up asan aimless poet is not confined to you or your President.
We haveknown the dodge for some time at Scotland Yard."
Gregory tried to spring up straight, but he swayed thrice.
"What do you say?"
he asked in an inhuman voice.
"Yes," said Syme simply, "I am a police detective.
But I think Ihear your friends coming."
From the doorway there came a murmur of "Mr. Joseph Chamberlain."
It was repeated twice and thrice, and then thirty times, and thecrowd of Joseph Chamberlains (a solemn thought) could be heardtrampling down the corridor.
CHAPTER IIITHE MAN WHO WAS THURSDAYBEFORE one of the fresh faces could appear at the doorway,Gregory's stunned surprise had fallen from him.
He was beside thetable with a bound, and a noise in his throat like a wild beast.
He caught up the Colt's revolver and took aim at Syme.
Syme didnot flinch, but he put up a pale and polite hand.
"Don't be such a silly man," he said, with the effeminate dignityof a curate.
"Don't you see it's not necessary?
Don't you see thatwe're both in the same boat?
Yes, and jolly sea-sick."
Gregory could not speak, but he could not fire either, and helooked his question.
"Don't you see we've checkmated each other?"
cried Syme.
"I can'ttell the police you are an anarchist.
You can't tell the anarchistsI'm a policeman.
I can only watch you, knowing what you are; youcan only watch me, knowing what I am.
In short, it's a lonely,intellectual duel, my head against yours.
I'm a policeman deprivedof the help of the police.
You, my poor fellow, are an anarchistdeprived of the help of that law and organisation which is soessential to anarchy.
The one solitary difference is in yourfavour.
You are not surrounded by inquisitive policemen; I amsurrounded by inquisitive anarchists.
I cannot betray you, but Imight betray myself.
Come, come!
wait and see me betray myself.
Ishall do it so nicely."
Gregory put the pistol slowly down, still staring at Syme as if hewere a sea-monster.
"I don't believe in immortality," he said at last, "but if, afterall this, you were to break your word, God would make a hell onlyfor you, to howl in for ever."
"I shall not break my word," said Syme sternly, "nor will youbreak yours.
Here are your friends."
The mass of the anarchists entered the room heavily, with aslouching and somewhat weary gait; but one little man, with ablack beard and glasses--a man somewhat of the type of Mr. TimHealy--detached himself, and bustled forward with some papersin his hand.
"Comrade Gregory," he said, "I suppose this man is a delegate?"
Gregory, taken by surprise, looked down and muttered the name ofSyme; but Syme replied almost pertly--"I am glad to see that your gate is well enough guarded to make ithard for anyone to be here who was not a delegate."
The brow of the little man with the black beard was, however, stillcontracted with something like suspicion.
"What branch do you represent?"
he asked sharply.
"I should hardly call it a branch," said Syme, laughing; "I shouldcall it at the very least a root."
"What do you mean?"
"The fact is," said Syme serenely, "the truth is I am aSabbatarian.
I have been specially sent here to see that you showa due observance of Sunday."
The little man dropped one of his papers, and a flicker of fearwent over all the faces of the group.
Evidently the awfulPresident, whose name was Sunday, did sometimes send down suchirregular ambassadors to such branch meetings.
"Well, comrade," said the man with the papers after a pause, "Isuppose we'd better give you a seat in the meeting?"
"If you ask my advice as a friend," said Syme with severebenevolence, "I think you'd better."
When Gregory heard the dangerous dialogue end, with a sudden safetyfor his rival, he rose abruptly and paced the floor in painfulthought.
He was, indeed, in an agony of diplomacy.
It was clearthat Syme's inspired impudence was likely to bring him out of allmerely accidental dilemmas.
Little was to be hoped from them.
Hecould not himself betray Syme, partly from honour, but partly alsobecause, if he betrayed him and for some reason failed to destroyhim, the Syme who escaped would be a Syme freed from all obligationof secrecy, a Syme who would simply walk to the nearest policestation.
After all, it was only one night's discussion, and onlyone detective who would know of it.
He would let out as little aspossible of their plans that night, and then let Syme go, andchance it.
He strode across to the group of anarchists, which was alreadydistributing itself along the benches.
"I think it is time we began," he said; "the steam-tug is waitingon the river already.
I move that Comrade Buttons takes the chair."
This being approved by a show of hands, the little man with thepapers slipped into the presidential seat.
"Comrades," he began, as sharp as a pistol-shot, "our meetingtonight is important, though it need not be long.
This branchhas always had the honour of electing Thursdays for the CentralEuropean Council.
We have elected many and splendid Thursdays.
Weall lament the sad decease of the heroic worker who occupied thepost until last week.
As you know, his services to the cause wereconsiderable.
He organised the great dynamite coup of Brightonwhich, under happier circumstances, ought to have killed everybodyon the pier.
As you also know, his death was as self-denying ashis life, for he died through his faith in a hygienic mixture ofchalk and water as a substitute for milk, which beverage heregarded as barbaric, and as involving cruelty to the cow.
Cruelty, or anything approaching to cruelty, revolted him always.
But it is not to acclaim his virtues that we are met, but for aharder task.
It is difficult properly to praise his qualities, butit is more difficult to replace them.
Upon you, comrades, itdevolves this evening to choose out of the company present the manwho shall be Thursday.
If any comrade suggests a name I will putit to the vote.
If no comrade suggests a name, I can only tellmyself that that dear dynamiter, who is gone from us, has carriedinto the unknowable abysses the last secret of his virtue and hisinnocence."
There was a stir of almost inaudible applause, such as is sometimesheard in church.
Then a large old man, with a long and venerablewhite beard, perhaps the only real working-man present, roselumberingly and said--"I move that Comrade Gregory be elected Thursday," and satlumberingly down again.
"Does anyone second?"
asked the chairman.
A little man with a velvet coat and pointed beard seconded.
"Before I put the matter to the vote," said the chairman, "I willcall on Comrade Gregory to make a statement."
Gregory rose amid a great rumble of applause.
His face was deadlypale, so that by contrast his queer red hair looked almost scarlet.
But he was smiling and altogether at ease.
He had made up his mind,and he saw his best policy quite plain in front of him like a whiteroad.
His best chance was to make a softened and ambiguous speech,such as would leave on the detective's mind the impression that theanarchist brotherhood was a very mild affair after all.
He believedin his own literary power, his capacity for suggesting fine shadesand picking perfect words.
He thought that with care he couldsucceed, in spite of all the people around him, in conveying animpression of the institution, subtly and delicately false.
Symehad once thought that anarchists, under all their bravado, wereonly playing the fool.
Could he not now, in the hour of peril, makeSyme think so again?
"Comrades," began Gregory, in a low but penetrating voice, "it isnot necessary for me to tell you what is my policy, for it is yourpolicy also.
Our belief has been slandered, it has been disfigured,it has been utterly confused and concealed, but it has never beenaltered.
Those who talk about anarchism and its dangers goeverywhere and anywhere to get their information, except to us,except to the fountain head.
They learn about anarchists fromsixpenny novels; they learn about anarchists from tradesmen'snewspapers; they learn about anarchists from Ally Sloper'sHalf-Holiday and the Sporting Times.
They never learn aboutanarchists from anarchists.
We have no chance of denying themountainous slanders which are heaped upon our heads from one endof Europe to another.
The man who has always heard that we arewalking plagues has never heard our reply.
I know that he will nothear it tonight, though my passion were to rend the roof.
For it isdeep, deep under the earth that the persecuted are permitted toassemble, as the Christians assembled in the Catacombs.
But if, bysome incredible accident, there were here tonight a man who all hislife had thus immensely misunderstood us, I would put this questionto him: 'When those Christians met in those Catacombs, what sort ofmoral reputation had they in the streets above?
What tales weretold of their atrocities by one educated Roman to another?
Suppose'(I would say to him), 'suppose that we are only repeating thatstill mysterious paradox of history.
Suppose we seem as shocking asthe Christians because we are really as harmless as the Christians.
Suppose we seem as mad as the Christians because we are really asmeek."'
The applause that had greeted the opening sentences had beengradually growing fainter, and at the last word it stoppedsuddenly.
In the abrupt silence, the man with the velvet jacketsaid, in a high, squeaky voice--"I'm not meek!"
"Comrade Witherspoon tells us," resumed Gregory, "that he is notmeek.
Ah, how little he knows himself!
His words are, indeed,extravagant; his appearance is ferocious, and even (to an ordinarytaste) unattractive.
But only the eye of a friendship as deep anddelicate as mine can perceive the deep foundation of solid meeknesswhich lies at the base of him, too deep even for himself to see.
Irepeat, we are the true early Christians, only that we come toolate.
We are simple, as they revere simple--look at ComradeWitherspoon.
We are modest, as they were modest--look at me.
We aremerciful--""No, no!"
called out Mr. Witherspoon with the velvet jacket.
"I say we are merciful," repeated Gregory furiously, "as the earlyChristians were merciful.
Yet this did not prevent their beingaccused of eating human flesh.
We do not eat human flesh--""Shame!"
cried Witherspoon.
"Why not?"
"Comrade Witherspoon," said Gregory, with a feverish gaiety, "isanxious to know why nobody eats him (laughter).
In our society, atany rate, which loves him sincerely, which is founded upon love--""No, no!"
said Witherspoon, "down with love."
"Which is founded upon love," repeated Gregory, grinding his teeth,"there will be no difficulty about the aims which we shall pursueas a body, or which I should pursue were I chosen as therepresentative of that body.
Superbly careless of the slanders thatrepresent us as assassins and enemies of human society, we shallpursue with moral courage and quiet intellectual pressure, thepermanent ideals of brotherhood and simplicity."
Gregory resumed his seat and passed his hand across his forehead.
The silence was sudden and awkward, but the chairman rose like anautomaton, and said in a colourless voice--"Does anyone oppose the election of Comrade Gregory?"
The assembly seemed vague and sub-consciously disappointed, andComrade Witherspoon moved restlessly on his seat and muttered inhis thick beard.
By the sheer rush of routine, however, the motionwould have been put and carried.
But as the chairman was openinghis mouth to put it, Syme sprang to his feet and said in a smalland quiet voice--"Yes, Mr. Chairman, I oppose."
The most effective fact in oratory is an unexpected change in thevoice.
Mr. Gabriel Syme evidently understood oratory.
Having saidthese first formal words in a moderated tone and with a briefsimplicity, he made his next word ring and volley in the vault asif one of the guns had gone off.
"Comrades!"
he cried, in a voice that made every man jump out ofhis boots, "have we come here for this?
Do we live underground likerats in order to listen to talk like this?
This is talk we mightlisten to while eating buns at a Sunday School treat.
Do we linethese walls with weapons and bar that door with death lest anyoneshould come and hear Comrade Gregory saying to us, 'Be good, andyou will be happy,' 'Honesty is the best policy,' and 'Virtue isits own reward'?
There was not a word in Comrade Gregory's addressto which a curate could not have listened with pleasure (hear,hear).
But I am not a curate (loud cheers), and I did not listen toit with pleasure (renewed cheers).
The man who is fitted to make agood curate is not fitted to make a resolute, forcible, andefficient Thursday (hear, hear)."
"Comrade Gregory has told us, in only too apologetic a tone, thatwe are not the enemies of society.
But I say that we are theenemies of society, and so much the worse for society.
We are theenemies of society, for society is the enemy of humanity, itsoldest and its most pitiless enemy (hear, hear).
Comrade Gregoryhas told us (apologetically again) that we are not murderers.
ThereI agree.
We are not murderers, we are executioners (cheers)."
Ever since Syme had risen Gregory had sat staring at him, his faceidiotic with astonishment.
Now in the pause his lips of clayparted, and he said, with an automatic and lifeless distinctness--"You damnable hypocrite!"
Syme looked straight into those frightful eyes with his own paleblue ones, and said with dignity--"Comrade Gregory accuses me of hypocrisy.
He knows as well as I dothat I am keeping all my engagements and doing nothing but my duty.
I do not mince words.
I do not pretend to.
I say that ComradeGregory is unfit to be Thursday for all his amiable qualities.
Heis unfit to be Thursday because of his amiable qualities.
We do notwant the Supreme Council of Anarchy infected with a maudlin mercy(hear, hear).
This is no time for ceremonial politeness, neither isit a time for ceremonial modesty.
I set myself against ComradeGregory as I would set myself against all the Governments ofEurope, because the anarchist who has given himself to anarchy hasforgotten modesty as much as he has forgotten pride (cheers).
I amnot a man at all.
I am a cause (renewed cheers).
I set myselfagainst Comrade Gregory as impersonally and as calmly as I shouldchoose one pistol rather than another out of that rack upon thewall; and I say that rather than have Gregory and hismilk-and-water methods on the Supreme Council, I would offer myselffor election--"His sentence was drowned in a deafening cataract of applause.
Thefaces, that had grown fiercer and fiercer with approval as histirade grew more and more uncompromising, were now distorted withgrins of anticipation or cloven with delighted cries.
At themoment when he announced himself as ready to stand for the post ofThursday, a roar of excitement and assent broke forth, and becameuncontrollable, and at the same moment Gregory sprang to his feet,with foam upon his mouth, and shouted against the shouting.
"Stop, you blasted madmen!"
he cried, at the top of a voice thattore his throat.
"Stop, you--"But louder than Gregory's shouting and louder than the roar of theroom came the voice of Syme, still speaking in a peal of pitilessthunder--"I do not go to the Council to rebut that slander that calls usmurderers; I go to earn it (loud and prolonged cheering).
To thepriest who says these men are the enemies of religion, to thejudge who says these men are the enemies of law, to the fatparliamentarian who says these men are the enemies of order andpublic decency, to all these I will reply, 'You are false kings,but you are true prophets.
I am come to destroy you, and to fulfilyour prophecies.'"
The heavy clamour gradually died away, but before it had ceasedWitherspoon had jumped to his feet, his hair and beard all on end,and had said--"I move, as an amendment, that Comrade Syme be appointed to the post."
"Stop all this, I tell you!"
cried Gregory, with frantic face andhands.
"Stop it, it is all--"The voice of the chairman clove his speech with a cold accent.
"Does anyone second this amendment?"
he said.
A tall, tired man,with melancholy eyes and an American chin beard, was observed onthe back bench to be slowly rising to his feet.
Gregory had beenscreaming for some time past; now there was a change in his accent,more shocking than any scream.
"I end all this!"
he said, in avoice as heavy as stone.
"This man cannot be elected.
He is a--""Yes," said Syme, quite motionless, "what is he?"
Gregory's mouthworked twice without sound; then slowly the blood began to crawlback into his dead face.
"He is a man quite inexperienced in ourwork," he said, and sat down abruptly.
Before he had done so, the long, lean man with the American beardwas again upon his feet, and was repeating in a high Americanmonotone--"I beg to second the election of Comrade Syme."
"The amendment will, as usual, be put first," said Mr. Buttons, thechairman, with mechanical rapidity.
"The question is that Comrade Syme--"Gregory had again sprung to his feet, panting and passionate.
"Comrades," he cried out, "I am not a madman."
"Oh, oh!"
said Mr. Witherspoon.
"I am not a madman," reiterated Gregory, with a frightful sinceritywhich for a moment staggered the room, "but I give you a counselwhich you can call mad if you like.
No, I will not call it acounsel, for I can give you no reason for it.
I will call it acommand.
Call it a mad command, but act upon it.
Strike, but hearme!
Kill me, but obey me!
Do not elect this man."
Truth is soterrible, even in fetters, that for a moment Syme's slender andinsane victory swayed like a reed.
But you could not have guessedit from Syme's bleak blue eyes.
He merely began--"Comrade Gregory commands--"Then the spell was snapped, and one anarchist called out to Gregory--"Who are you?
You are not Sunday"; and another anarchist added in aheavier voice, "And you are not Thursday."
"Comrades," cried Gregory, in a voice like that of a martyr who inan ecstacy of pain has passed beyond pain, "it is nothing to mewhether you detest me as a tyrant or detest me as a slave.
If youwill not take my command, accept my degradation.
I kneel to you.
Ithrow myself at your feet.
I implore you.
Do not elect this man."
"Comrade Gregory," said the chairman after a painful pause, "thisis really not quite dignified."
For the first time in the proceedings there was for a few seconds areal silence.
Then Gregory fell back in his seat, a pale wreck of aman, and the chairman repeated, like a piece of clock-work suddenlystarted again--"The question is that Comrade Syme be elected to the post ofThursday on the General Council."
The roar rose like the sea, the hands rose like a forest, and threeminutes afterwards Mr. Gabriel Syme, of the Secret Police Service,was elected to the post of Thursday on the General Council of theAnarchists of Europe.
Everyone in the room seemed to feel the tug waiting on the river,the sword-stick and the revolver, waiting on the table.
The instantthe election was ended and irrevocable, and Syme had received thepaper proving his election, they all sprang to their feet, and thefiery groups moved and mixed in the room.
Syme found himself,somehow or other, face to face with Gregory, who still regarded himwith a stare of stunned hatred.
They were silent for many minutes.
"You are a devil!"
said Gregory at last.
"And you are a gentleman," said Syme with gravity.
"It was you that entrapped me," began Gregory, shaking from headto foot, "entrapped me into--""Talk sense," said Syme shortly.
"Into what sort of devils'parliament have you entrapped me, if it comes to that?
You made meswear before I made you.
Perhaps we are both doing what we thinkright.
But what we think right is so damned different that therecan be nothing between us in the way of concession.
There isnothing possible between us but honour and death," and he pulledthe great cloak about his shoulders and picked up the flask fromthe table.
"The boat is quite ready," said Mr. Buttons, bustling up.
"Be goodenough to step this way."
With a gesture that revealed the shop-walker, he led Syme down ashort, iron-bound passage, the still agonised Gregory followingfeverishly at their heels.
At the end of the passage was a door,which Buttons opened sharply, showing a sudden blue and silverpicture of the moonlit river, that looked like a scene in atheatre.
Close to the opening lay a dark, dwarfish steam-launch,like a baby dragon with one red eye.
Almost in the act of stepping on board, Gabriel Syme turned to thegaping Gregory.
"You have kept your word," he said gently, with his face in shadow.
"You are a man of honour, and I thank you.
You have kept it evendown to a small particular.
There was one special thing youpromised me at the beginning of the affair, and which you havecertainly given me by the end of it."
"What do you mean?"
cried the chaotic Gregory.
"What did I promiseyou?"
"A very entertaining evening," said Syme, and he made a militarysalute with the sword-stick as the steamboat slid away.
CHAPTER IVTHE TALE OF A DETECTIVEGABRIEL SYME was not merely a detective who pretended to be a poet;he was really a poet who had become a detective.
Nor was his hatredof anarchy hypocritical.
He was one of those who are driven earlyin life into too conservative an attitude by the bewildering follyof most revolutionists.
He had not attained it by any tametradition.
His respectability was spontaneous and sudden, arebellion against rebellion.
He came of a family of cranks, inwhich all the oldest people had all the newest notions.
One of hisuncles always walked about without a hat, and another had made anunsuccessful attempt to walk about with a hat and nothing else.
Hisfather cultivated art and self-realisation; his mother went in forsimplicity and hygiene.
Hence the child, during his tenderer years,was wholly unacquainted with any drink between the extremes ofabsinth and cocoa, of both of which he had a healthy dislike.
Themore his mother preached a more than Puritan abstinence the moredid his father expand into a more than pagan latitude; and by thetime the former had come to enforcing vegetarianism, the latter hadpretty well reached the point of defending cannibalism.
Being surrounded with every conceivable kind of revolt frominfancy, Gabriel had to revolt into something, so he revolted intothe only thing left--sanity.
But there was just enough in him ofthe blood of these fanatics to make even his protest for commonsense a little too fierce to be sensible.
His hatred of modernlawlessness had been crowned also by an accident.
It happened thathe was walking in a side street at the instant of a dynamiteoutrage.
He had been blind and deaf for a moment, and then seen,the smoke clearing, the broken windows and the bleeding faces.
After that he went about as usual--quiet, courteous, rather gentle;but there was a spot on his mind that was not sane.
He did notregard anarchists, as most of us do, as a handful of morbid men,combining ignorance with intellectualism.
He regarded them as ahuge and pitiless peril, like a Chinese invasion.
He poured perpetually into newspapers and their waste-paper basketsa torrent of tales, verses and violent articles, warning men ofthis deluge of barbaric denial.
But he seemed to be getting nonearer his enemy, and, what was worse, no nearer a living.
As hepaced the Thames embankment, bitterly biting a cheap cigar andbrooding on the advance of Anarchy, there was no anarchist witha bomb in his pocket so savage or so solitary as he.
Indeed, healways felt that Government stood alone and desperate, with itsback to the wall.
He was too quixotic to have cared for itotherwise.
He walked on the Embankment once under a dark red sunset.
The redriver reflected the red sky, and they both reflected his anger.
Thesky, indeed, was so swarthy, and the light on the river relativelyso lurid, that the water almost seemed of fiercer flame than thesunset it mirrored.
It looked like a stream of literal fire windingunder the vast caverns of a subterranean country.
Syme was shabby in those days.
He wore an old-fashioned blackchimney-pot hat; he was wrapped in a yet more old-fashioned cloak,black and ragged; and the combination gave him the look of theearly villains in Dickens and Bulwer Lytton.
Also his yellow beardand hair were more unkempt and leonine than when they appeared longafterwards, cut and pointed, on the lawns of Saffron Park.
A long,lean, black cigar, bought in Soho for twopence, stood out frombetween his tightened teeth, and altogether he looked a verysatisfactory specimen of the anarchists upon whom he had vowed aholy war.
Perhaps this was why a policeman on the Embankment spoketo him, and said "Good evening."
Syme, at a crisis of his morbid fears for humanity, seemed stung bythe mere stolidity of the automatic official, a mere bulk of bluein the twilight.
"A good evening is it?"
he said sharply.
"You fellows would callthe end of the world a good evening.
Look at that bloody red sunand that bloody river!
I tell you that if that were literally humanblood, spilt and shining, you would still be standing here as solidas ever, looking out for some poor harmless tramp whom you couldmove on.
You policemen are cruel to the poor, but I could forgiveyou even your cruelty if it were not for your calm."
"If we are calm," replied the policeman, "it is the calm oforganised resistance."
"Eh?"
said Syme, staring.
"The soldier must be calm in the thick of the battle," pursued thepoliceman.
"The composure of an army is the anger of a nation."
"Good God, the Board Schools!"
said Syme.
"Is this undenominationaleducation?"
"No," said the policeman sadly, "I never had any of thoseadvantages.
The Board Schools came after my time.
What educationI had was very rough and old-fashioned, I am afraid."
"Where did you have it?"
asked Syme, wondering.
"Oh, at Harrow," said the policemanThe class sympathies which, false as they are, are the truestthings in so many men, broke out of Syme before he could controlthem.
"But, good Lord, man," he said, "you oughtn't to be a policeman!"
The policeman sighed and shook his head.
"I know," he said solemnly, "I know I am not worthy."
"But why did you join the police?"
asked Syme with rude curiosity.
"For much the same reason that you abused the police," replied theother.
"I found that there was a special opening in the service forthose whose fears for humanity were concerned rather with theaberrations of the scientific intellect than with the normal andexcusable, though excessive, outbreaks of the human will.
I trustI make myself clear."
"If you mean that you make your opinion clear," said Syme, "Isuppose you do.
But as for making yourself clear, it is the lastthing you do.
How comes a man like you to be talking philosophyin a blue helmet on the Thames embankment?
"You have evidently not heard of the latest development in ourpolice system," replied the other.
"I am not surprised at it.
Weare keeping it rather dark from the educated class, because thatclass contains most of our enemies.
But you seem to be exactly inthe right frame of mind.
I think you might almost join us."
"Join you in what?"
asked Syme.
"I will tell you," said the policeman slowly.
"This is thesituation: The head of one of our departments, one of the mostcelebrated detectives in Europe, has long been of opinion that apurely intellectual conspiracy would soon threaten the veryexistence of civilisation.
He is certain that the scientific andartistic worlds are silently bound in a crusade against the Familyand the State.
He has, therefore, formed a special corps ofpolicemen, policemen who are also philosophers.
It is theirbusiness to watch the beginnings of this conspiracy, not merely ina criminal but in a controversial sense.
I am a democrat myself,and I am fully aware of the value of the ordinary man in matters ofordinary valour or virtue.
But it would obviously be undesirable toemploy the common policeman in an investigation which is also aheresy hunt."
Syme's eyes were bright with a sympathetic curiosity.
"What do you do, then?"
he said.
"The work of the philosophical policeman," replied the man inblue, "is at once bolder and more subtle than that of the ordinarydetective.
The ordinary detective goes to pot-houses to arrestthieves; we go to artistic tea-parties to detect pessimists.
Theordinary detective discovers from a ledger or a diary that a crimehas been committed.
We discover from a book of sonnets that a crimewill be committed.
We have to trace the origin of those dreadfulthoughts that drive men on at last to intellectual fanaticism andintellectual crime.
We were only just in time to prevent theassassination at Hartle pool, and that was entirely due to the factthat our Mr. Wilks (a smart young fellow) thoroughly understood atriolet."
"Do you mean," asked Syme, "that there is really as much connectionbetween crime and the modern intellect as all that?"
"You are not sufficiently democratic," answered the policeman, "butyou were right when you said just now that our ordinary treatmentof the poor criminal was a pretty brutal business.
I tell you I amsometimes sick of my trade when I see how perpetually it meansmerely a war upon the ignorant and the desperate.
But this newmovement of ours is a very different affair.
We deny the snobbishEnglish assumption that the uneducated are the dangerous criminals.
We remember the Roman Emperors.
We remember the great poisoningprinces of the Renaissance.
We say that the dangerous criminal isthe educated criminal.
We say that the most dangerous criminal nowis the entirely lawless modern philosopher.
Compared to him,burglars and bigamists are essentially moral men; my heart goes outto them.
They accept the essential ideal of man; they merely seekit wrongly.
Thieves respect property.
They merely wish the propertyto become their property that they may more perfectly respect it.
But philosophers dislike property as property; they wish to destroythe very idea of personal possession.
Bigamists respect marriage,or they would not go through the highly ceremonial and evenritualistic formality of bigamy.
But philosophers despise marriageas marriage.
Murderers respect human life; they merely wish toattain a greater fulness of human life in themselves by thesacrifice of what seems to them to be lesser lives.
Butphilosophers hate life itself, their own as much as otherpeople's."
Syme struck his hands together.
"How true that is," he cried.
"I have felt it from my boyhood, butnever could state the verbal antithesis.
The common criminal is abad man, but at least he is, as it were, a conditional good man.
He says that if only a certain obstacle be removed--say a wealthyuncle--he is then prepared to accept the universe and to praiseGod.
He is a reformer, but not an anarchist.
He wishes to cleansethe edifice, but not to destroy it.
But the evil philosopher isnot trying to alter things, but to annihilate them.
Yes, themodern world has retained all those parts of police work which arereally oppressive and ignominious, the harrying of the poor, thespying upon the unfortunate.
It has given up its more dignifiedwork, the punishment of powerful traitors the in the State andpowerful heresiarchs in the Church.
The moderns say we must notpunish heretics.
My only doubt is whether we have a right topunish anybody else."
"But this is absurd!"
cried the policeman, clasping his hands withan excitement uncommon in persons of his figure and costume, "butit is intolerable!
I don't know what you're doing, but you'rewasting your life.
You must, you shall, join our special armyagainst anarchy.
Their armies are on our frontiers.
Their boltis ready to fall.
A moment more, and you may lose the glory ofworking with us, perhaps the glory of dying with the last heroesof the world."
"It is a chance not to be missed, certainly," assented Syme, "butstill I do not quite understand.
I know as well as anybody thatthe modern world is full of lawless little men and mad littlemovements.
But, beastly as they are, they generally have the onemerit of disagreeing with each other.
How can you talk of theirleading one army or hurling one bolt.
What is this anarchy?"
"Do not confuse it," replied the constable, "with those chancedynamite outbreaks from Russia or from Ireland, which are reallythe outbreaks of oppressed, if mistaken, men.
This is a vastphilosophic movement, consisting of an outer and an inner ring.
You might even call the outer ring the laity and the inner ringthe priesthood.
I prefer to call the outer ring the innocentsection, the inner ring the supremely guilty section.
The outerring--the main mass of their supporters--are merely anarchists;that is, men who believe that rules and formulas have destroyedhuman happiness.
They believe that all the evil results of humancrime are the results of the system that has called it crime.
Theydo not believe that the crime creates the punishment.
They believethat the punishment has created the crime.
They believe that if aman seduced seven women he would naturally walk away as blamelessas the flowers of spring.
They believe that if a man picked apocket he would naturally feel exquisitely good.
These I call theinnocent section."
"Oh!"
said Syme.
"Naturally, therefore, these people talk about 'a happy timecoming'; 'the paradise of the future'; 'mankind freed from thebondage of vice and the bondage of virtue,' and so on.
And so alsothe men of the inner circle speak--the sacred priesthood.
Theyalso speak to applauding crowds of the happiness of the future,and of mankind freed at last.
But in their mouths"--and thepoliceman lowered his voice--"in their mouths these happy phraseshave a horrible meaning.
They are under no illusions; they are toointellectual to think that man upon this earth can ever be quitefree of original sin and the struggle.
And they mean death.
Whenthey say that mankind shall be free at last, they mean thatmankind shall commit suicide.
When they talk of a paradise withoutright or wrong, they mean the grave.
They have but two objects, to destroy first humanity and thenthemselves.
That is why they throw bombs instead of firing pistols.
The innocent rank and file are disappointed because the bomb hasnot killed the king; but the high-priesthood are happy because ithas killed somebody."
"How can I join you?"
asked Syme, with a sort of passion.
"I know for a fact that there is a vacancy at the moment," said thepoliceman, "as I have the honour to be somewhat in the confidenceof the chief of whom I have spoken.
You should really come and seehim.
Or rather, I should not say see him, nobody ever sees him; butyou can talk to him if you like."
"Telephone?"
inquired Syme, with interest.
"No," said the policeman placidly, "he has a fancy for alwayssitting in a pitch-dark room.
He says it makes his thoughtsbrighter.
Do come along."
Somewhat dazed and considerably excited, Syme allowed himself to beled to a side-door in the long row of buildings of Scotland Yard.
Almost before he knew what he was doing, he had been passed throughthe hands of about four intermediate officials, and was suddenlyshown into a room, the abrupt blackness of which startled him likea blaze of light.
It was not the ordinary darkness, in which formscan be faintly traced; it was like going suddenly stone-blind.
"Are you the new recruit?"
asked a heavy voice.
And in some strange way, though there was not the shadow of a shapein the gloom, Syme knew two things: first, that it came from a manof massive stature; and second, that the man had his back to him.
"Are you the new recruit?"
said the invisible chief, who seemed tohave heard all about it.
"All right.
You are engaged."
Syme, quite swept off his feet, made a feeble fight against thisirrevocable phrase.
"I really have no experience," he began.
"No one has any experience," said the other, "of the Battle ofArmageddon."
"But I am really unfit--""You are willing, that is enough," said the unknown.
"Well, really," said Syme, "I don't know any profession of whichmere willingness is the final test."
"I do," said the other--"martyrs.
I am condemning you to death.
Good day."
Thus it was that when Gabriel Syme came out again into the crimsonlight of evening, in his shabby black hat and shabby, lawlesscloak, he came out a member of the New Detective Corps for thefrustration of the great conspiracy.
Acting under the advice of hisfriend the policeman (who was professionally inclined to neatness),he trimmed his hair and beard, bought a good hat, clad himself inan exquisite summer suit of light blue-grey, with a pale yellowflower in the button-hole, and, in short, became that elegant andrather insupportable person whom Gregory had first encountered inthe little garden of Saffron Park.
Before he finally left thepolice premises his friend provided him with a small blue card,on which was written, "The Last Crusade," and a number, the signof his official authority.
He put this carefully in his upperwaistcoat pocket, lit a cigarette, and went forth to track andfight the enemy in all the drawing-rooms of London.
Where hisadventure ultimately led him we have already seen.
At abouthalf-past one on a February night he found himself steaming in asmall tug up the silent Thames, armed with swordstick and revolver,the duly elected Thursday of the Central Council of Anarchists.
When Syme stepped out on to the steam-tug he had a singularsensation of stepping out into something entirely new; not merelyinto the landscape of a new land, but even into the landscape of anew planet.
This was mainly due to the insane yet solid decision ofthat evening, though partly also to an entire change in the weatherand the sky since he entered the little tavern some two hoursbefore.
Every trace of the passionate plumage of the cloudy sunsethad been swept away, and a naked moon stood in a naked sky.
Themoon was so strong and full that (by a paradox often to be noticed)it seemed like a weaker sun.
It gave, not the sense of brightmoonshine, but rather of a dead daylight.
Over the whole landscape lay a luminous and unnaturaldiscoloration, as of that disastrous twilight which Milton spokeof as shed by the sun in eclipse; so that Syme fell easily intohis first thought, that he was actually on some other and emptierplanet, which circled round some sadder star.
But the more he feltthis glittering desolation in the moonlit land, the more his ownchivalric folly glowed in the night like a great fire.
Even thecommon things he carried with him--the food and the brandy and theloaded pistol--took on exactly that concrete and material poetrywhich a child feels when he takes a gun upon a journey or a bunwith him to bed.
The sword-stick and the brandy-flask, though inthemselves only the tools of morbid conspirators, became theexpressions of his own more healthy romance.
The sword-stickbecame almost the sword of chivalry, and the brandy the wine ofthe stirrup-cup.
For even the most dehumanised modern fantasiesdepend on some older and simpler figure; the adventures may bemad, but the adventurer must be sane.
The dragon without St.George would not even be grotesque.
So this inhuman landscape wasonly imaginative by the presence of a man really human.
To Syme'sexaggerative mind the bright, bleak houses and terraces by theThames looked as empty as the mountains of the moon.
But even themoon is only poetical because there is a man in the moon.
The tug was worked by two men, and with much toil wentcomparatively slowly.
The clear moon that had lit up Chiswick hadgone down by the time that they passed Battersea, and when theycame under the enormous bulk of Westminster day had already begunto break.
It broke like the splitting of great bars of lead,showing bars of silver; and these had brightened like white firewhen the tug, changing its onward course, turned inward to a largelanding stage rather beyond Charing Cross.
The great stones of the Embankment seemed equally dark and giganticas Syme looked up at them.
They were big and black against the hugewhite dawn.
They made him feel that he was landing on the colossalsteps of some Egyptian palace; and, indeed, the thing suited hismood, for he was, in his own mind, mounting to attack the solidthrones of horrible and heathen kings.
He leapt out of the boat onto one slimy step, and stood, a dark and slender figure, amid theenormous masonry.
The two men in the tug put her off again andturned up stream.
They had never spoken a word.
CHAPTER VTHE FEAST OF FEARAT first the large stone stair seemed to Syme as deserted as apyramid; but before he reached the top he had realised that therewas a man leaning over the parapet of the Embankment and lookingout across the river.
As a figure he was quite conventional, cladin a silk hat and frock-coat of the more formal type of fashion;he had a red flower in his buttonhole.
As Syme drew nearer to himstep by step, he did not even move a hair; and Syme could comeclose enough to notice even in the dim, pale morning light thathis face was long, pale and intellectual, and ended in a smalltriangular tuft of dark beard at the very point of the chin, allelse being clean-shaven.
This scrap of hair almost seemed a mereoversight; the rest of the face was of the type that is bestshaven--clear-cut, ascetic, and in its way noble.
Syme drew closerand closer, noting all this, and still the figure did not stir.
At first an instinct had told Syme that this was the man whom hewas meant to meet.
Then, seeing that the man made no sign, he hadconcluded that he was not.
And now again he had come back to acertainty that the man had something to do with his mad adventure.
For the man remained more still than would have been natural if astranger had come so close.
He was as motionless as a wax-work,and got on the nerves somewhat in the same way.
Syme looked againand again at the pale, dignified and delicate face, and the facestill looked blankly across the river.
Then he took out of hispocket the note from Buttons proving his election, and put itbefore that sad and beautiful face.
Then the man smiled, and hissmile was a shock, for it was all on one side, going up in theright cheek and down in the left.
There was nothing, rationally speaking, to scare anyone aboutthis.
Many people have this nervous trick of a crooked smile, andin many it is even attractive.
But in all Syme's circumstances,with the dark dawn and the deadly errand and the loneliness on thegreat dripping stones, there was something unnerving in it.
There was the silent river and the silent man, a man of evenclassic face.
And there was the last nightmare touch that hissmile suddenly went wrong.
The spasm of smile was instantaneous, and the man's face droppedat once into its harmonious melancholy.
He spoke without furtherexplanation or inquiry, like a man speaking to an old colleague.
"If we walk up towards Leicester Square," he said, "we shall justbe in time for breakfast.
Sunday always insists on an earlybreakfast.
Have you had any sleep?"
"No," said Syme.
"Nor have I," answered the man in an ordinary tone.
"I shall try toget to bed after breakfast."
He spoke with casual civility, but in an utterly dead voice thatcontradicted the fanaticism of his face.
It seemed almost as if allfriendly words were to him lifeless conveniences, and that his onlylife was hate.
After a pause the man spoke again.
"Of course, the Secretary of the branch told you everything thatcan be told.
But the one thing that can never be told is the lastnotion of the President, for his notions grow like a tropicalforest.
So in case you don't know, I'd better tell you that he iscarrying out his notion of concealing ourselves by not concealingourselves to the most extraordinary lengths just now.
Originally,of course, we met in a cell underground, just as your branch does.
Then Sunday made us take a private room at an ordinary restaurant.
He said that if you didn't seem to be hiding nobody hunted you out.
Well, he is the only man on earth, I know; but sometimes I reallythink that his huge brain is going a little mad in its old age.
Fornow we flaunt ourselves before the public.
We have our breakfast ona balcony--on a balcony, if you please--overlooking LeicesterSquare."
"And what do the people say?"
asked Syme.
"It's quite simple what they say," answered his guide.
"They say we are a lot of jolly gentlemen who pretend they areanarchists."
"It seems to me a very clever idea," said Syme.
"Clever!
God blast your impudence!
Clever!"
cried out the other ina sudden, shrill voice which was as startling and discordant as hiscrooked smile.
"When you've seen Sunday for a split second you'llleave off calling him clever."
With this they emerged out of a narrow street, and saw the earlysunlight filling Leicester Square.
It will never be known, Isuppose, why this square itself should look so alien and in someways so continental.
It will never be known whether it was theforeign look that attracted the foreigners or the foreigners whogave it the foreign look.
But on this particular morning the effectseemed singularly bright and clear.
Between the open square and thesunlit leaves and the statue and the Saracenic outlines of theAlhambra, it looked the replica of some French or even Spanishpublic place.
And this effect increased in Syme the sensation,which in many shapes he had had through the whole adventure, theeerie sensation of having strayed into a new world.
As a fact, hehad bought bad cigars round Leicester Square ever since he was aboy.
But as he turned that corner, and saw the trees and theMoorish cupolas, he could have sworn that he was turning into anunknown Place de something or other in some foreign town.
At one corner of the square there projected a kind of angle of aprosperous but quiet hotel, the bulk of which belonged to a streetbehind.
In the wall there was one large French window, probablythe window of a large coffee-room; and outside this window, almostliterally overhanging the square, was a formidably buttressedbalcony, big enough to contain a dining-table.
In fact, it didcontain a dining-table, or more strictly a breakfast-table; andround the breakfast-table, glowing in the sunlight and evident tothe street, were a group of noisy and talkative men, all dressedin the insolence of fashion, with white waistcoats and expensivebutton-holes.
Some of their jokes could almost be heard across thesquare.
Then the grave Secretary gave his unnatural smile, and Symeknew that this boisterous breakfast party was the secret conclaveof the European Dynamiters.
Then, as Syme continued to stare at them, he saw something that hehad not seen before.
He had not seen it literally because it wastoo large to see.
At the nearest end of the balcony, blocking up agreat part of the perspective, was the back of a great mountain ofa man.
When Syme had seen him, his first thought was that theweight of him must break down the balcony of stone.
His vastnessdid not lie only in the fact that he was abnormally tall and quiteincredibly fat.
This man was planned enormously in his originalproportions, like a statue carved deliberately as colossal.
Hishead, crowned with white hair, as seen from behind looked biggerthan a head ought to be.
The ears that stood out from it lookedlarger than human ears.
He was enlarged terribly to scale; and thissense of size was so staggering, that when Syme saw him all theother figures seemed quite suddenly to dwindle and become dwarfish.
They were still sitting there as before with their flowers andfrock-coats, but now it looked as if the big man was entertainingfive children to tea.
As Syme and the guide approached the side door of the hotel, awaiter came out smiling with every tooth in his head.
"The gentlemen are up there, sare," he said.
"They do talk and theydo laugh at what they talk.
They do say they will throw bombs at zeking."
And the waiter hurried away with a napkin over his arm, muchpleased with the singular frivolity of the gentlemen upstairs.
The two men mounted the stairs in silence.
Syme had never thought of asking whether the monstrous man whoalmost filled and broke the balcony was the great President of whomthe others stood in awe.
He knew it was so, with an unaccountablebut instantaneous certainty.
Syme, indeed, was one of those men whoare open to all the more nameless psychological influences in adegree a little dangerous to mental health.
Utterly devoid of fearin physical dangers, he was a great deal too sensitive to the smellof spiritual evil.
Twice already that night little unmeaning thingshad peeped out at him almost pruriently, and given him a sense ofdrawing nearer and nearer to the head-quarters of hell.
And thissense became overpowering as he drew nearer to the great President.
The form it took was a childish and yet hateful fancy.
As he walkedacross the inner room towards the balcony, the large face of Sundaygrew larger and larger; and Syme was gripped with a fear that whenhe was quite close the face would be too big to be possible, andthat he would scream aloud.
He remembered that as a child he wouldnot look at the mask of Memnon in the British Museum, because itwas a face, and so large.
By an effort, braver than that of leaping over a cliff, he went toan empty seat at the breakfast-table and sat down.
The men greetedhim with good-humoured raillery as if they had always known him.
Hesobered himself a little by looking at their conventional coats andsolid, shining coffee-pot; then he looked again at Sunday.
His facewas very large, but it was still possible to humanity.
In the presence of the President the whole company lookedsufficiently commonplace; nothing about them caught the eye atfirst, except that by the President's caprice they had been dressedup with a festive respectability, which gave the meal the look of awedding breakfast.
One man indeed stood out at even a superficialglance.
He at least was the common or garden Dynamiter.
He wore,indeed, the high white collar and satin tie that were the uniformof the occasion; but out of this collar there sprang a head quiteunmanageable and quite unmistakable, a bewildering bush of brownhair and beard that almost obscured the eyes like those of a Skyeterrier.
But the eyes did look out of the tangle, and they were thesad eyes of some Russian serf.
The effect of this figure was notterrible like that of the President, but it had every diableriethat can come from the utterly grotesque.
If out of that stiff tieand collar there had come abruptly the head of a cat or a dog, itcould not have been a more idiotic contrast.
The man's name, it seemed, was Gogol; he was a Pole, and in thiscircle of days he was called Tuesday.
His soul and speech wereincurably tragic; he could not force himself to play theprosperous and frivolous part demanded of him by President Sunday.
And, indeed, when Syme came in the President, with that daringdisregard of public suspicion which was his policy, was actuallychaffing Gogol upon his inability to assume conventional graces.
"Our friend Tuesday," said the President in a deep voice at onceof quietude and volume, "our friend Tuesday doesn't seem to graspthe idea.
He dresses up like a gentleman, but he seems to be toogreat a soul to behave like one.
He insists on the ways of thestage conspirator.
Now if a gentleman goes about London in a tophat and a frock-coat, no one need know that he is an anarchist.
But if a gentleman puts on a top hat and a frock-coat, and thengoes about on his hands and knees--well, he may attract attention.
That's what Brother Gogol does.
He goes about on his hands andknees with such inexhaustible diplomacy, that by this time hefinds it quite difficult to walk upright."
"I am not good at goncealment," said Gogol sulkily, with a thickforeign accent; "I am not ashamed of the cause."
"Yes you are, my boy, and so is the cause of you," said thePresident good-naturedly.
"You hide as much as anybody; but youcan't do it, you see, you're such an ass!
You try to combine twoinconsistent methods.
When a householder finds a man under hisbed, he will probably pause to note the circumstance.
But if hefinds a man under his bed in a top hat, you will agree with me, my dear Tuesday, that he is not likely even to forget it.
Nowwhen you were found under Admiral Biffin's bed--""I am not good at deception," said Tuesday gloomily, flushing.
"Right, my boy, right," said the President with a ponderousheartiness, "you aren't good at anything."
While this stream of conversation continued, Syme was lookingmore steadily at the men around him.
As he did so, he graduallyfelt all his sense of something spiritually queer return.
He had thought at first that they were all of common stature andcostume, with the evident exception of the hairy Gogol.
But as helooked at the others, he began to see in each of them exactly whathe had seen in the man by the river, a demoniac detail somewhere.
That lop-sided laugh, which would suddenly disfigure the fineface of his original guide, was typical of all these types.
Eachman had something about him, perceived perhaps at the tenth ortwentieth glance, which was not normal, and which seemed hardlyhuman.
The only metaphor he could think of was this, that theyall looked as men of fashion and presence would look, with theadditional twist given in a false and curved mirror.
Only the individual examples will express this half-concealedeccentricity.
Syme's original cicerone bore the title of Monday;he was the Secretary of the Council, and his twisted smile wasregarded with more terror than anything, except the President'shorrible, happy laughter.
But now that Syme had more space andlight to observe him, there were other touches.
His fine facewas so emaciated, that Syme thought it must be wasted with somedisease; yet somehow the very distress of his dark eyes deniedthis.
It was no physical ill that troubled him.
His eyes werealive with intellectual torture, as if pure thought was pain.
He was typical of each of the tribe; each man was subtly anddifferently wrong.
Next to him sat Tuesday, the tousle-headedGogol, a man more obviously mad.
Next was Wednesday, a certainMarquis de St. Eustache, a sufficiently characteristic figure.
Thefirst few glances found nothing unusual about him, except that hewas the only man at table who wore the fashionable clothes as ifthey were really his own.
He had a black French beard cut squareand a black English frock-coat cut even squarer.
But Syme,sensitive to such things, felt somehow that the man carried a richatmosphere with him, a rich atmosphere that suffocated.
Itreminded one irrationally of drowsy odours and of dying lamps inthe darker poems of Byron and Poe.
With this went a sense of hisbeing clad, not in lighter colours, but in softer materials; hisblack seemed richer and warmer than the black shades about him, asif it were compounded of profound colour.
His black coat looked asif it were only black by being too dense a purple.
His black beardlooked as if it were only black by being too deep a blue.
And inthe gloom and thickness of the beard his dark red mouth showedsensual and scornful.
Whatever he was he was not a Frenchman; hemight be a Jew; he might be something deeper yet in the dark heartof the East.
In the bright coloured Persian tiles and picturesshowing tyrants hunting, you may see just those almond eyes, thoseblue-black beards, those cruel, crimson lips.
Then came Syme, and next a very old man, Professor de Worms, whostill kept the chair of Friday, though every day it was expectedthat his death would leave it empty.
Save for his intellect, he wasin the last dissolution of senile decay.
His face was as grey ashis long grey beard, his forehead was lifted and fixed finally in afurrow of mild despair.
In no other case, not even that of Gogol,did the bridegroom brilliancy of the morning dress express a morepainful contrast.
For the red flower in his button-hole showed upagainst a face that was literally discoloured like lead; the wholehideous effect was as if some drunken dandies had put their clothesupon a corpse.
When he rose or sat down, which was with long labourand peril, something worse was expressed than mere weakness,something indefinably connected with the horror of the whole scene.
It did not express decrepitude merely, but corruption.
Anotherhateful fancy crossed Syme's quivering mind.
He could not helpthinking that whenever the man moved a leg or arm might fall off.
Right at the end sat the man called Saturday, the simplest and themost baffling of all.
He was a short, square man with a dark,square face clean-shaven, a medical practitioner going by the nameof Bull.
He had that combination of savoir-faire with a sort ofwell-groomed coarseness which is not uncommon in young doctors.
Hecarried his fine clothes with confidence rather than ease, and hemostly wore a set smile.
There was nothing whatever odd about him,except that he wore a pair of dark, almost opaque spectacles.
Itmay have been merely a crescendo of nervous fancy that had gonebefore, but those black discs were dreadful to Syme; they remindedhim of half-remembered ugly tales, of some story about penniesbeing put on the eyes of the dead.
Syme's eye always caught theblack glasses and the blind grin.
Had the dying Professor wornthem, or even the pale Secretary, they would have been appropriate.
But on the younger and grosser man they seemed only an enigma.
Theytook away the key of the face.
You could not tell what his smile orhis gravity meant.
Partly from this, and partly because he had avulgar virility wanting in most of the others it seemed to Symethat he might be the wickedest of all those wicked men.
Syme evenhad the thought that his eyes might be covered up because they weretoo frightful to see.
CHAPTER VITHE EXPOSURESUCH were the six men who had sworn to destroy the world.
Againand again Syme strove to pull together his common sense in theirpresence.
Sometimes he saw for an instant that these notions weresubjective, that he was only looking at ordinary men, one of whomwas old, another nervous, another short-sighted.
The sense of anunnatural symbolism always settled back on him again.
Each figureseemed to be, somehow, on the borderland of things, just as theirtheory was on the borderland of thought.
He knew that each one ofthese men stood at the extreme end, so to speak, of some wild roadof reasoning.
He could only fancy, as in some old-world fable,that if a man went westward to the end of the world he would findsomething--say a tree--that was more or less than a tree, a treepossessed by a spirit; and that if he went east to the end of theworld he would find something else that was not wholly itself--atower, perhaps, of which the very shape was wicked.
So thesefigures seemed to stand up, violent and unaccountable, against anultimate horizon, visions from the verge.
The ends of the earthwere closing in.
Talk had been going on steadily as he took in the scene; and notthe least of the contrasts of that bewildering breakfast-table wasthe contrast between the easy and unobtrusive tone of talk and itsterrible purport.
They were deep in the discussion of an actual andimmediate plot.
The waiter downstairs had spoken quite correctlywhen he said that they were talking about bombs and kings.
Onlythree days afterwards the Czar was to meet the President of theFrench Republic in Paris, and over their bacon and eggs upon theirsunny balcony these beaming gentlemen had decided how both shoulddie.
Even the instrument was chosen; the black-bearded Marquis, itappeared, was to carry the bomb.
Ordinarily speaking, the proximity of this positive and objectivecrime would have sobered Syme, and cured him of all his merelymystical tremors.
He would have thought of nothing but the need ofsaving at least two human bodies from being ripped in pieces withiron and roaring gas.
But the truth was that by this time he hadbegun to feel a third kind of fear, more piercing and practicalthan either his moral revulsion or his social responsibility.
Verysimply, he had no fear to spare for the French President or theCzar; he had begun to fear for himself.
Most of the talkers tooklittle heed of him, debating now with their faces closer together,and almost uniformly grave, save when for an instant the smile ofthe Secretary ran aslant across his face as the jagged lightningruns aslant across the sky.
But there was one persistent thingwhich first troubled Syme and at last terrified him.
The Presidentwas always looking at him, steadily, and with a great and bafflinginterest.
The enormous man was quite quiet, but his blue eyesstood out of his head.
And they were always fixed on Syme.
Syme felt moved to spring up and leap over the balcony.
When thePresident's eyes were on him he felt as if he were made of glass.
He had hardly the shred of a doubt that in some silent andextraordinary way Sunday had found out that he was a spy.
Helooked over the edge of the balcony, and saw a policeman, standingabstractedly just beneath, staring at the bright railings and thesunlit trees.
Then there fell upon him the great temptation that was to tormenthim for many days.
In the presence of these powerful and repulsivemen, who were the princes of anarchy, he had almost forgotten thefrail and fanciful figure of the poet Gregory, the mere aesthete ofanarchism.
He even thought of him now with an old kindness, as ifthey had played together when children.
But he remembered that hewas still tied to Gregory by a great promise.
He had promised neverto do the very thing that he now felt himself almost in the act ofdoing.
He had promised not to jump over that balcony and speak tothat policeman.
He took his cold hand off the cold stonebalustrade.
His soul swayed in a vertigo of moral indecision.
Hehad only to snap the thread of a rash vow made to a villainoussociety, and all his life could be as open and sunny as the squarebeneath him.
He had, on the other hand, only to keep his antiquatedhonour, and be delivered inch by inch into the power of this greatenemy of mankind, whose very intellect was a torture-chamber.
Whenever he looked down into the square he saw the comfortablepoliceman, a pillar of common sense and common order.
Whenever helooked back at the breakfast-table he saw the President stillquietly studying him with big, unbearable eyes.
In all the torrent of his thought there were two thoughts thatnever crossed his mind.
First, it never occurred to him to doubtthat the President and his Council could crush him if he continuedto stand alone.
The place might be public, the project might seemimpossible.
But Sunday was not the man who would carry himselfthus easily without having, somehow or somewhere, set open hisiron trap.
Either by anonymous poison or sudden street accident,by hypnotism or by fire from hell, Sunday could certainly strikehim.
If he defied the man he was probably dead, either struckstiff there in his chair or long afterwards as by an innocentailment.
If he called in the police promptly, arrested everyone,told all, and set against them the whole energy of England, hewould probably escape; certainly not otherwise.
They were abalconyful of gentlemen overlooking a bright and busy square; buthe felt no more safe with them than if they had been a boatful ofarmed pirates overlooking an empty sea.
There was a second thought that never came to him.
It neveroccurred to him to be spiritually won over to the enemy.
Manymoderns, inured to a weak worship of intellect and force, mighthave wavered in their allegiance under this oppression of a greatpersonality.
They might have called Sunday the super-man.
If anysuch creature be conceivable, he looked, indeed, somewhat like it,with his earth-shaking abstraction, as of a stone statue walking.
He might have been called something above man, with his largeplans, which were too obvious to be detected, with his large face,which was too frank to be understood.
But this was a kind ofmodern meanness to which Syme could not sink even in his extrememorbidity.
Like any man, he was coward enough to fear great force;but he was not quite coward enough to admire it.
The men were eating as they talked, and even in this they weretypical.
Dr. Bull and the Marquis ate casually and conventionallyof the best things on the table--cold pheasant or Strasbourg pie.
But the Secretary was a vegetarian, and he spoke earnestly of theprojected murder over half a raw tomato and three quarters of aglass of tepid water.
The old Professor had such slops as suggesteda sickening second childhood.
And even in this President Sundaypreserved his curious predominance of mere mass.
For he ate liketwenty men; he ate incredibly, with a frightful freshness ofappetite, so that it was like watching a sausage factory.
Yetcontinually, when he had swallowed a dozen crumpets or drunk aquart of coffee, he would be found with his great head on one sidestaring at Syme.
"I have often wondered," said the Marquis, taking a great bite outof a slice of bread and jam, "whether it wouldn't be better for meto do it with a knife.
Most of the best things have been broughtoff with a knife.
And it would be a new emotion to get a knife intoa French President and wriggle it round."
"You are wrong," said the Secretary, drawing his black browstogether.
"The knife was merely the expression of the old personalquarrel with a personal tyrant.
Dynamite is not only our best tool,but our best symbol.
It is as perfect a symbol of us as is incenseof the prayers of the Christians.
It expands; it only destroysbecause it broadens; even so, thought only destroys because itbroadens.
A man's brain is a bomb," he cried out, looseningsuddenly his strange passion and striking his own skull withviolence.
"My brain feels like a bomb, night and day.
It mustexpand!
It must expand!
A man's brain must expand, if it breaks upthe universe."
"I don't want the universe broken up just yet," drawled theMarquis.
"I want to do a lot of beastly things before I die.
I thought of one yesterday in bed."
"No, if the only end of the thing is nothing," said Dr. Bull withhis sphinx-like smile, "it hardly seems worth doing."
The old Professor was staring at the ceiling with dull eyes.
"Every man knows in his heart," he said, "that nothing is worthdoing."
There was a singular silence, and then the Secretary said--"We are wandering, however, from the point.
The only question ishow Wednesday is to strike the blow.
I take it we should all agreewith the original notion of a bomb.
As to the actual arrangements,I should suggest that tomorrow morning he should go first of allto--"The speech was broken off short under a vast shadow.
PresidentSunday had risen to his feet, seeming to fill the sky above them.
"Before we discuss that," he said in a small, quiet voice, "let usgo into a private room.
I have something vent particular to say."
Syme stood up before any of the others.
The instant of choice hadcome at last, the pistol was at his head.
On the pavement beforehe could hear the policeman idly stir and stamp, for the morning,though bright, was cold.
A barrel-organ in the street suddenly sprang with a jerk into ajovial tune.
Syme stood up taut, as if it had been a bugle beforethe battle.
He found himself filled with a supernatural couragethat came from nowhere.
That jingling music seemed full of thevivacity, the vulgarity, and the irrational valour of the poor, whoin all those unclean streets were all clinging to the decencies andthe charities of Christendom.
His youthful prank of being apoliceman had faded from his mind; he did not think of himself asthe representative of the corps of gentlemen turned into fancyconstables, or of the old eccentric who lived in the dark room.
But he did feel himself as the ambassador of all these common andkindly people in the street, who every day marched into battle tothe music of the barrel-organ.
And this high pride in being humanhad lifted him unaccountably to an infinite height above themonstrous men around him.
For an instant, at least, he looked downupon all their sprawling eccentricities from the starry pinnacleof the commonplace.
He felt towards them all that unconscious andelementary superiority that a brave man feels over powerful beastsor a wise man over powerful errors.
He knew that he had neither theintellectual nor the physical strength of President Sunday; but inthat moment he minded it no more than the fact that he had not themuscles of a tiger or a horn on his nose like a rhinoceros.
All wasswallowed up in an ultimate certainty that the President was wrongand that the barrel-organ was right.
There clanged in his mind thatunanswerable and terrible truism in the song of Roland--"Pagens ont tort et Chretiens ont droit."
which in the old nasal French has the clang and groan of greatiron.
This liberation of his spirit from the load of his weaknesswent with a quite clear decision to embrace death.
If the people ofthe barrel-organ could keep their old-world obligations, so couldhe.
This very pride in keeping his word was that he was keeping itto miscreants.
It was his last triumph over these lunatics to godown into their dark room and die for something that they could noteven understand.
The barrel-organ seemed to give the marching tunewith the energy and the mingled noises of a whole orchestra; and hecould hear deep and rolling, under all the trumpets of the pride oflife, the drums of the pride of death.
The conspirators were already filing through the open window andinto the rooms behind.
Syme went last, outwardly calm, but with allhis brain and body throbbing with romantic rhythm.
The Presidentled them down an irregular side stair, such as might be used byservants, and into a dim, cold, empty room, with a table andbenches, like an abandoned boardroom.
When they were all in, heclosed and locked the door.
The first to speak was Gogol, the irreconcilable, who seemedbursting with inarticulate grievance.
"Zso!
Zso!"
he cried, with an obscure excitement, his heavy Polishaccent becoming almost impenetrable.
"You zay you nod 'ide.
You zayyou show himselves.
It is all nuzzinks.
Ven you vant talkimportance you run yourselves in a dark box!"
The President seemed to take the foreigner's incoherent satire withentire good humour.
"You can't get hold of it yet, Gogol," he said in a fatherly way.
"When once they have heard us talking nonsense on that balcony theywill not care where we go afterwards.
If we had come here first, weshould have had the whole staff at the keyhole.
You don't seem toknow anything about mankind."
"I die for zem," cried the Pole in thick excitement, "and I slayzare oppressors.
I care not for these games of gonzealment.
I wouldzmite ze tyrant in ze open square."
"I see, I see," said the President, nodding kindly as he seatedhimself at the top of a long table.
"You die for mankind first, andthen you get up and smite their oppressors.
So that's all right.
And now may I ask you to control your beautiful sentiments, and sitdown with the other gentlemen at this table.
For the first timethis morning something intelligent is going to be said."
Syme, with the perturbed promptitude he had shown since theoriginal summons, sat down first.
Gogol sat down last, grumblingin his brown beard about gombromise.
No one except Syme seemed tohave any notion of the blow that was about to fall.
As for him,he had merely the feeling of a man mounting the scaffold with theintention, at any rate, of making a good speech.
"Comrades," said the President, suddenly rising, "we have spun outthis farce long enough.
I have called you down here to tell yousomething so simple and shocking that even the waiters upstairs(long inured to our levities) might hear some new seriousness inmy voice.
Comrades, we were discussing plans and naming places.
Ipropose, before saying anything else, that those plans and placesshould not be voted by this meeting, but should be left wholly inthe control of some one reliable member.
I suggest ComradeSaturday, Dr.
Bull."
They all stared at him; then they all started in their seats, forthe next words, though not loud, had a living and sensationalemphasis.
Sunday struck the table.
"Not one word more about the plans and places must be said at thismeeting.
Not one tiny detail more about what we mean to do must bementioned in this company."
Sunday had spent his life in astonishing his followers; but itseemed as if he had never really astonished them until now.
Theyall moved feverishly in their seats, except Syme.
He sat stiff inhis, with his hand in his pocket, and on the handle of his loadedrevolver.
When the attack on him came he would sell his life dear.
He would find out at least if the President was mortal.
Sunday went on smoothly--"You will probably understand that there is only one possiblemotive for forbidding free speech at this festival of freedom.
Strangers overhearing us matters nothing.
They assume that weare joking.
But what would matter, even unto death, is this,that there should be one actually among us who is not of us,who knows our grave purpose, but does not share it, who--"The Secretary screamed out suddenly like a woman.
"It can't be!"
he cried, leaping.
"There can't--"The President flapped his large flat hand on the table like thefin of some huge fish.
"Yes," he said slowly, "there is a spy in this room.
There is atraitor at this table.
I will waste no more words.
His name--"Syme half rose from his seat, his finger firm on the trigger.
"His name is Gogol," said the President.
"He is that hairy humbugover there who pretends to be a Pole."
Gogol sprang to his feet, a pistol in each hand.
With the sameflash three men sprang at his throat.
Even the Professor madean effort to rise.
But Syme saw little of the scene, for he wasblinded with a beneficent darkness; he had sunk down into hisseat shuddering, in a palsy of passionate relief.
CHAPTER VIITHE UNACCOUNTABLE CONDUCT OF PROFESSOR DE WORMS"SIT down!"
said Sunday in a voice that he used once or twice inhis life, a voice that made men drop drawn swords.
The three who had risen fell away from Gogol, and that equivocalperson himself resumed his seat.
"Well, my man," said the President briskly, addressing him as oneaddresses a total stranger, "will you oblige me by putting yourhand in your upper waistcoat pocket and showing me what you havethere?"
The alleged Pole was a little pale under his tangle of dark hair,but he put two fingers into the pocket with apparent coolness andpulled out a blue strip of card.
When Syme saw it lying on thetable, he woke up again to the world outside him.
For althoughthe card lay at the other extreme of the table, and he could readnothing of the inscription on it, it bore a startling resemblanceto the blue card in his own pocket, the card which had been givento him when he joined the anti-anarchist constabulary.
"Pathetic Slav," said the President, "tragic child of Poland, areyou prepared in the presence of that card to deny that you are inthis company--shall we say de trop?"
"Right oh!"
said the late Gogol.
It made everyone jump to hear aclear, commercial and somewhat cockney voice coming out of thatforest of foreign hair.
It was irrational, as if a Chinaman hadsuddenly spoken with a Scotch accent.
"I gather that you fully understand your position," said Sunday.
"You bet," answered the Pole.
"I see it's a fair cop.
All I say is,I don't believe any Pole could have imitated my accent like I didhis."
"I concede the point," said Sunday.
"I believe your own accent tobe inimitable, though I shall practise it in my bath.
Do you mindleaving your beard with your card?"
"Not a bit," answered Gogol; and with one finger he ripped off thewhole of his shaggy head-covering, emerging with thin red hair anda pale, pert face.
"It was hot," he added.
"I will do you the justice to say," said Sunday, not without a sortof brutal admiration, "that you seem to have kept pretty cool underit.
Now listen to me.
I like you.
The consequence is that it wouldannoy me for just about two and a half minutes if I heard that youhad died in torments.
Well, if you ever tell the police or anyhuman soul about us, I shall have that two and a half minutes ofdiscomfort.
On your discomfort I will not dwell.
Good day.
Mind thestep."
The red-haired detective who had masqueraded as Gogol rose to hisfeet without a word, and walked out of the room with an air ofperfect nonchalance.
Yet the astonished Syme was able to realisethat this ease was suddenly assumed; for there was a slight stumbleoutside the door, which showed that the departing detective had notminded the step.
"Time is flying," said the President in his gayest manner, afterglancing at his watch, which like everything about him seemedbigger than it ought to be.
"I must go off at once; I have totake the chair at a Humanitarian meeting."
The Secretary turned to him with working eyebrows.
"Would it not be better," he said a little sharply, "to discussfurther the details of our project, now that the spy has left us?"
"No, I think not," said the President with a yawn like anunobtrusive earthquake.
"Leave it as it is.
Let Saturday settleit.
I must be off.
Breakfast here next Sunday."
But the late loud scenes had whipped up the almost naked nervesof the Secretary.
He was one of those men who are conscientiouseven in crime.
"I must protest, President, that the thing is irregular," he said.
"It is a fundamental rule of our society that all plans shall bedebated in full council.
Of course, I fully appreciate yourforethought when in the actual presence of a traitor--""Secretary," said the President seriously, "if you'd take your headhome and boil it for a turnip it might be useful.
I can't say.
Butit might.
The Secretary reared back in a kind of equine anger.
"I really fail to understand--" he began in high offense.
"That's it, that's it," said the President, nodding a great manytimes.
"That's where you fail right enough.
You fail to understand.
Why, you dancing donkey," he roared, rising, "you didn't want to beoverheard by a spy, didn't you?
How do you know you aren'toverheard now?"
And with these words he shouldered his way out of the room, shakingwith incomprehensible scorn.
Four of the men left behind gaped after him without any apparentglimmering of his meaning.
Syme alone had even a glimmering, andsuch as it was it froze him to the bone.
If the last words of thePresident meant anything, they meant that he had not after allpassed unsuspected.
They meant that while Sunday could not denouncehim like Gogol, he still could not trust him like the others.
The other four got to their feet grumbling more or less, and betookthemselves elsewhere to find lunch, for it was already well pastmidday.
The Professor went last, very slowly and painfully.
Symesat long after the rest had gone, revolving his strange position.
He had escaped a thunderbolt, but he was still under a cloud.
Atlast he rose and made his way out of the hotel into LeicesterSquare.
The bright, cold day had grown increasingly colder, andwhen he came out into the street he was surprised by a few flakesof snow.
While he still carried the sword-stick and the rest ofGregory's portable luggage, he had thrown the cloak down and leftit somewhere, perhaps on the steam-tug, perhaps on the balcony.
Hoping, therefore, that the snow-shower might be slight, he steppedback out of the street for a moment and stood up under the doorwayof a small and greasy hair-dresser's shop, the front window ofwhich was empty, except for a sickly wax lady in evening dress.
Snow, however, began to thicken and fall fast; and Syme, havingfound one glance at the wax lady quite sufficient to depress hisspirits, stared out instead into the white and empty street.
He wasconsiderably astonished to see, standing quite still outside theshop and staring into the window, a man.
His top hat was loadedwith snow like the hat of Father Christmas, the white drift wasrising round his boots and ankles; but it seemed as if nothingcould tear him away from the contemplation of the colourless waxdoll in dirty evening dress.
That any human being should stand insuch weather looking into such a shop was a matter of sufficientwonder to Syme; but his idle wonder turned suddenly into a personalshock; for he realised that the man standing there was theparalytic old Professor de Worms.
It scarcely seemed the place fora person of his years and infirmities.
Syme was ready to believe anything about the perversions of thisdehumanized brotherhood; but even he could not believe that theProfessor had fallen in love with that particular wax lady.
Hecould only suppose that the man's malady (whatever it was) involvedsome momentary fits of rigidity or trance.
He was not inclined,however, to feel in this case any very compassionate concern.
Onthe contrary, he rather congratulated himself that the Professor'sstroke and his elaborate and limping walk would make it easy toescape from him and leave him miles behind.
For Syme thirsted firstand last to get clear of the whole poisonous atmosphere, if onlyfor an hour.
Then he could collect his thoughts, formulate hispolicy, and decide finally whether he should or should not keepfaith with Gregory.
He strolled away through the dancing snow, turned up two or threestreets, down through two or three others, and entered a small Sohorestaurant for lunch.
He partook reflectively of four small andquaint courses, drank half a bottle of red wine, and ended up overblack coffee and a black cigar, still thinking.
He had taken hisseat in the upper room of the restaurant, which was full of thechink of knives and the chatter of foreigners.
He remembered thatin old days he had imagined that all these harmless and kindlyaliens were anarchists.
He shuddered, remembering the real thing.
But even the shudder had the delightful shame of escape.
The wine,the common food, the familiar place, the faces of natural andtalkative men, made him almost feel as if the Council of the SevenDays had been a bad dream; and although he knew it was neverthelessan objective reality, it was at least a distant one.
Tall housesand populous streets lay between him and his last sight of theshameful seven; he was free in free London, and drinking wine amongthe free.
With a somewhat easier action, he took his hat and stickand strolled down the stair into the shop below.
When he entered that lower room he stood stricken and rooted to thespot.
At a small table, close up to the blank window and the whitestreet of snow, sat the old anarchist Professor over a glass ofmilk, with his lifted livid face and pendent eyelids.
For aninstant Syme stood as rigid as the stick he leant upon.
Then with agesture as of blind hurry, he brushed past the Professor, dashingopen the door and slamming it behind him, and stood outside in thesnow.
"Can that old corpse be following me?"
he asked himself, biting hisyellow moustache.
"I stopped too long up in that room, so that evensuch leaden feet could catch me up.
One comfort is, with a littlebrisk walking I can put a man like that as far away as Timbuctoo.
Or am I too fanciful?
Was he really following me?
Surely Sundaywould not be such a fool as to send a lame man? "
He set off at a smart pace, twisting and whirling his stick, inthe direction of Covent Garden.
As he crossed the great market thesnow increased, growing blinding and bewildering as the afternoonbegan to darken.
The snow-flakes tormented him like a swarm ofsilver bees.
Getting into his eyes and beard, they added theirunremitting futility to his already irritated nerves; and by thetime that he had come at a swinging pace to the beginning of FleetStreet, he lost patience, and finding a Sunday teashop, turnedinto it to take shelter.
He ordered another cup of black coffeeas an excuse.
Scarcely had he done so, when Professor de Wormshobbled heavily into the shop, sat down with difficulty andordered a glass of milk.
Syme's walking-stick had fallen from his hand with a great clang,which confessed the concealed steel.
But the Professor did not lookround.
Syme, who was commonly a cool character, was literallygaping as a rustic gapes at a conjuring trick.
He had seen no cabfollowing; he had heard no wheels outside the shop; to all mortalappearances the man had come on foot.
But the old man could onlywalk like a snail, and Syme had walked like the wind.
He started upand snatched his stick, half crazy with the contradiction in merearithmetic, and swung out of the swinging doors, leaving his coffeeuntasted.
An omnibus going to the Bank went rattling by with anunusual rapidity.
He had a violent run of a hundred yards to reachit; but he managed to spring, swaying upon the splash-board and,pausing for an instant to pant, he climbed on to the top.
When hehad been seated for about half a minute, he heard behind him a sortof heavy and asthmatic breathing.
Turning sharply, he saw rising gradually higher and higher upthe omnibus steps a top hat soiled and dripping with snow, andunder the shadow of its brim the short-sighted face and shakyshoulders of Professor de Worms.
He let himself into a seat withcharacteristic care, and wrapped himself up to the chin in themackintosh rug.
Every movement of the old man's tottering figure and vague hands,every uncertain gesture and panic-stricken pause, seemed to putit beyond question that he was helpless, that he was in the lastimbecility of the body.
He moved by inches, he let himself downwith little gasps of caution.
And yet, unless the philosophicalentities called time and space have no vestige even of a practicalexistence, it appeared quite unquestionable that he had run afterthe omnibus.
Syme sprang erect upon the rocking car, and after staring wildlyat the wintry sky, that grew gloomier every moment, he ran downthe steps.
He had repressed an elemental impulse to leap over theside.
Too bewildered to look back or to reason, he rushed into one ofthe little courts at the side of Fleet Street as a rabbit rushesinto a hole.
He had a vague idea, if this incomprehensible oldJack-in-the-box was really pursuing him, that in that labyrinth oflittle streets he could soon throw him off the scent.
He dived inand out of those crooked lanes, which were more like cracks thanthoroughfares; and by the time that he had completed about twentyalternate angles and described an unthinkable polygon, he pausedto listen for any sound of pursuit.
There was none; there couldnot in any case have been much, for the little streets were thickwith the soundless snow.
Somewhere behind Red Lion Court, however,he noticed a place where some energetic citizen had cleared awaythe snow for a space of about twenty yards, leaving the wet,glistening cobble-stones.
He thought little of this as he passedit, only plunging into yet another arm of the maze.
But when a fewhundred yards farther on he stood still again to listen, his heartstood still also, for he heard from that space of rugged stonesthe clinking crutch and labouring feet of the infernal cripple.
The sky above was loaded with the clouds of snow, leaving Londonin a darkness and oppression premature for that hour of theevening.
On each side of Syme the walls of the alley were blindand featureless; there was no little window or any kind of eve.
Hefelt a new impulse to break out of this hive of houses, and to getonce more into the open and lamp-lit street.
Yet he rambled anddodged for a long time before he struck the main thoroughfare.
When he did so, he struck it much farther up than he had fancied.
He came out into what seemed the vast and void of Ludgate Circus,and saw St. Paul's Cathedral sitting in the sky.
At first he was startled to find these great roads so empty, as ifa pestilence had swept through the city.
Then he told himself thatsome degree of emptiness was natural; first because the snow-stormwas even dangerously deep, and secondly because it was Sunday.
Andat the very word Sunday he bit his lip; the word was henceforth forhire like some indecent pun.
Under the white fog of snow high up inthe heaven the whole atmosphere of the city was turned to a veryqueer kind of green twilight, as of men under the sea.
The sealedand sullen sunset behind the dark dome of St. Paul's had in itsmoky and sinister colours--colours of sickly green, dead red ordecaying bronze, that were just bright enough to emphasise thesolid whiteness of the snow.
But right up against these drearycolours rose the black bulk of the cathedral; and upon the top ofthe cathedral was a random splash and great stain of snow, stillclinging as to an Alpine peak.
It had fallen accidentally, but justso fallen as to half drape the dome from its very topmost point,and to pick out in perfect silver the great orb and the cross.
WhenSyme saw it he suddenly straightened himself, and made with hissword-stick an involuntary salute.
He knew that that evil figure, his shadow, was creeping quickly orslowly behind him, and he did not care.
It seemed a symbol of human faith and valour that while the skieswere darkening that high place of the earth was bright.
Thedevils might have captured heaven, but they had not yet capturedthe cross.
He had a new impulse to tear out the secret of thisdancing, jumping and pursuing paralytic; and at the entrance ofthe court as it opened upon the Circus he turned, stick in hand,to face his pursuer.
Professor de Worms came slowly round the corner of the irregularalley behind him, his unnatural form outlined against a lonelygas-lamp, irresistibly recalling that very imaginative figure inthe nursery rhymes, "the crooked man who went a crooked mile."
Hereally looked as if he had been twisted out of shape by thetortuous streets he had been threading.
He came nearer and nearer,the lamplight shining on his lifted spectacles, his lifted,patient face.
Syme waited for him as St. George waited for thedragon, as a man waits for a final explanation or for death.
Andthe old Professor came right up to him and passed him like a totalstranger, without even a blink of his mournful eyelids.
There was something in this silent and unexpected innocence thatleft Syme in a final fury.
The man's colourless face and mannerseemed to assert that the whole following had been an accident.
Syme was galvanised with an energy that was something betweenbitterness and a burst of boyish derision.
He made a wild gestureas if to knock the old man's hat off, called out something like"Catch me if you can," and went racing away across the white, openCircus.
Concealment was impossible now; and looking back over hisshoulder, he could see the black figure of the old gentleman comingafter him with long, swinging strides like a man winning a milerace.
But the head upon that bounding body was still pale, graveand professional, like the head of a lecturer upon the body of aharlequin.
This outrageous chase sped across Ludgate Circus, up Ludgate Hill,round St. Paul's Cathedral, along Cheapside, Syme remembering allthe nightmares he had ever known.
Then Syme broke away towards theriver, and ended almost down by the docks.
He saw the yellow panesof a low, lighted public-house, flung himself into it and orderedbeer.
It was a foul tavern, sprinkled with foreign sailors, aplace where opium might be smoked or knives drawn.
A moment later Professor de Worms entered the place, sat downcarefully, and asked for a glass of milk.
CHAPTER VIIITHE PROFESSOR EXPLAINSWHEN Gabriel Syme found himself finally established in a chair,and opposite to him, fixed and final also, the lifted eyebrows andleaden eyelids of the Professor, his fears fully returned.
Thisincomprehensible man from the fierce council, after all, hadcertainly pursued him.
If the man had one character as a paralyticand another character as a pursuer, the antithesis might make himmore interesting, but scarcely more soothing.
It would be a verysmall comfort that he could not find the Professor out, if by someserious accident the Professor should find him out.
He emptied awhole pewter pot of ale before the professor had touched his milk.
One possibility, however, kept him hopeful and yet helpless.
It wasjust possible that this escapade signified something other thaneven a slight suspicion of him.
Perhaps it was some regular form orsign.
Perhaps the foolish scamper was some sort of friendly signalthat he ought to have understood.
Perhaps it was a ritual.
Perhapsthe new Thursday was always chased along Cheapside, as the new LordMayor is always escorted along it.
He was just selecting atentative inquiry, when the old Professor opposite suddenly andsimply cut him short.
Before Syme could ask the first diplomaticquestion, the old anarchist had asked suddenly, without any sort ofpreparation--"Are you a policeman?"
Whatever else Syme had expected, he had never expected anything sobrutal and actual as this.
Even his great presence of mind couldonly manage a reply with an air of rather blundering jocularity.
"A policeman?"
he said, laughing vaguely.
"Whatever made you thinkof a policeman in connection with me?"
"The process was simple enough," answered the Professor patiently.
"I thought you looked like a policeman.
I think so now."
"Did I take a policeman's hat by mistake out of the restaurant?"
asked Syme, smiling wildly.
"Have I by any chance got a numberstuck on to me somewhere?
Have my boots got that watchful look?
Why must I be a policeman?
Do, do let me be a postman."
The old Professor shook his head with a gravity that gave no hope,but Syme ran on with a feverish irony.
"But perhaps I misunderstood the delicacies of your Germanphilosophy.
Perhaps policeman is a relative term.
In anevolutionary sense, sir, the ape fades so gradually into thepoliceman, that I myself can never detect the shade.
The monkey isonly the policeman that may be.
Perhaps a maiden lady on ClaphamCommon is only the policeman that might have been.
I don't mindbeing the policeman that might have been.
I don't mind beinganything in German thought."
"Are you in the police service?"
said the old man, ignoring allSyme's improvised and desperate raillery.
"Are you a detective?"
Syme's heart turned to stone, but his face never changed.
"Your suggestion is ridiculous," he began.
"Why on earth--"The old man struck his palsied hand passionately on the ricketytable, nearly breaking it.
"Did you hear me ask a plain question, you pattering spy?"
heshrieked in a high, crazy voice.
"Are you, or are you not, apolice detective?"
"No!"
answered Syme, like a man standing on the hangman's drop.
"You swear it," said the old man, leaning across to him, his deadface becoming as it were loathsomely alive.
"You swear it!
Youswear it!
If you swear falsely, will you be damned?
Will you besure that the devil dances at your funeral?
Will you see that thenightmare sits on your grave?
Will there really be no mistake?
Youare an anarchist, you are a dynamiter!
Above all, you are not inany sense a detective?
You are not in the British police?"
He leant his angular elbow far across the table, and put up hislarge loose hand like a flap to his ear.
"I am not in the British police," said Syme with insane calm.
Professor de Worms fell back in his chair with a curious air ofkindly collapse.
"That's a pity," he said, "because I am."
Syme sprang up straight, sending back the bench behind him with acrash.
"Because you are what?"
he said thickly.
"You are what?"
"I am a policeman," said the Professor with his first broad smile.
and beaming through his spectacles.
"But as you think policemanonly a relative term, of course I have nothing to do with you.
Iam in the British police force; but as you tell me you are not inthe British police force, I can only say that I met you in adynamiters' club.
I suppose I ought to arrest you."
And with thesewords he laid on the table before Syme an exact facsimile of theblue card which Syme had in his own waistcoat pocket, the symbolof his power from the police.
Syme had for a flash the sensation that the cosmos had turnedexactly upside down, that all trees were growing downwards andthat all stars were under his feet.
Then came slowly the oppositeconviction.
For the last twenty-four hours the cosmos had reallybeen upside down, but now the capsized universe had come right sideup again.
This devil from whom he had been fleeing all day was onlyan elder brother of his own house, who on the other side of thetable lay back and laughed at him.
He did not for the moment askany questions of detail; he only knew the happy and silly fact thatthis shadow, which had pursued him with an intolerable oppressionof peril, was only the shadow of a friend trying to catch him up.
He knew simultaneously that he was a fool and a free man.
For withany recovery from morbidity there must go a certain healthyhumiliation.
There comes a certain point in such conditions whenonly three things are possible: first a perpetuation of Satanicpride, secondly tears, and third laughter.
Syme's egotism held hardto the first course for a few seconds, and then suddenly adoptedthe third.
Taking his own blue police ticket from his own waistcoat pocket, he tossed it on to the table; then he flung his headback until his spike of yellow beard almost pointed at the ceiling,and shouted with a barbaric laughter.
Even in that close den, perpetually filled with the din of knives,plates, cans, clamorous voices, sudden struggles and stampedes,there was something Homeric in Syme's mirth which made manyhalf-drunken men look round.
"What yer laughing at, guv'nor?"
asked one wondering labourer fromthe docks.
"At myself," answered Syme, and went off again into the agony ofhis ecstatic reaction.
"Pull yourself together," said the Professor, "or you'll gethysterical.
Have some more beer.
I'll join you."
"You haven't drunk your milk," said Syme.
"My milk!"
said the other, in tones of withering and unfathomablecontempt, "my milk!
Do you think I'd look at the beastly stuff whenI'm out of sight of the bloody anarchists?
We're all Christians inthis room, though perhaps," he added, glancing around at thereeling crowd, "not strict ones.
Finish my milk?
Great blazes!
yes,I'll finish it right enough!"
and he knocked the tumbler off thetable, making a crash of glass and a splash of silver fluid.
Syme was staring at him with a happy curiosity.
"I understand now," he cried; "of course, you're not an old man atall."
"I can't take my face off here," replied Professor de Worms.
"It'srather an elaborate make-up.
As to whether I'm an old man, that'snot for me to say.
I was thirty-eight last birthday."
"Yes, but I mean," said Syme impatiently, "there's nothing thematter with you."
"Yes," answered the other dispassionately.
"I am subject to colds."
Syme's laughter at all this had about it a wild weakness of relief.
He laughed at the idea of the paralytic Professor being really ayoung actor dressed up as if for the foot-lights.
But he felt thathe would have laughed as loudly if a pepperpot had fallen over.
The false Professor drank and wiped his false beard.
"Did you know," he asked, "that that man Gogol was one of us?"
"I?
No, I didn't know it," answered Syme in some surprise.
"Butdidn't you?"
"I knew no more than the dead," replied the man who called himselfde Worms.
"I thought the President was talking about me, and Irattled in my boots."
"And I thought he was talking about me," said Syme, with his ratherreckless laughter.
"I had my hand on my revolver all the time."
"So had I," said the Professor grimly; "so had Gogol evidently."
Syme struck the table with an exclamation.
"Why, there were three of us there!"
he cried.
"Three out of sevenis a fighting number.
If we had only known that we were three!"
The face of Professor de Worms darkened, and he did not look up.
"We were three," he said.
"If we had been three hundred we couldstill have done nothing."
"Not if we were three hundred against four?"
asked Syme, jeeringrather boisterously.
"No," said the Professor with sobriety, "not if we were threehundred against Sunday."
And the mere name struck Syme cold and serious; his laughter haddied in his heart before it could die on his lips.
The face ofthe unforgettable President sprang into his mind as startling asa coloured photograph, and he remarked this difference betweenSunday and all his satellites, that their faces, however fierceor sinister, became gradually blurred by memory like other humanfaces, whereas Sunday's seemed almost to grow more actual duringabsence, as if a man's painted portrait should slowly come alive.
They were both silent for a measure of moments, and then Syme'sspeech came with a rush, like the sudden foaming of champagne.
"Professor," he cried, "it is intolerable.
Are you afraid of thisman?"
The Professor lifted his heavy lids, and gazed at Syme with large,wide-open, blue eyes of an almost ethereal honesty.
"Yes, I am," he said mildly.
"So are you."
Syme was dumb for an instant.
Then he rose to his feet erect, likean insulted man, and thrust the chair away from him.
"Yes," he said in a voice indescribable, "you are right.
I amafraid of him.
Therefore I swear by God that I will seek out thisman whom I fear until I find him, and strike him on the mouth.
Ifheaven were his throne and the earth his footstool, I swear thatI would pull him down."
"How?"
asked the staring Professor.
"Why?"
"Because I am afraid of him," said Syme; "and no man should leavein the universe anything of which he is afraid."
De Worms blinked at him with a sort of blind wonder.
He made aneffort to speak, but Syme went on in a low voice, but with anundercurrent of inhuman exaltation--"Who would condescend to strike down the mere things that he doesnot fear?
Who would debase himself to be merely brave, like anycommon prizefighter?
Who would stoop to be fearless--like a tree?
Fight the thing that you fear.
You remember the old tale of theEnglish clergyman who gave the last rites to the brigand of Sicily,and how on his death-bed the great robber said, 'I can give you nomoney, but I can give you advice for a lifetime: your thumb on theblade, and strike upwards.'
So I say to you, strike upwards, if youstrike at the stars."
The other looked at the ceiling, one of the tricks of his pose.
"Sunday is a fixed star," he said.
"You shall see him a falling star," said Syme, and put on his hat.
The decision of his gesture drew the Professor vaguely to his feet.
"Have you any idea," he asked, with a sort of benevolentbewilderment, "exactly where you are going?"
"Yes," replied Syme shortly, "I am going to prevent this bomb beingthrown in Paris."
"Have you any conception how?"
inquired the other.
"No," said Syme with equal decision.
"You remember, of course," resumed the soi-disant de Worms, pullinghis beard and looking out of the window, "that when we broke uprather hurriedly the whole arrangements for the atrocity were leftin the private hands of the Marquis and Dr. Bull.
The Marquis is bythis time probably crossing the Channel.
But where he will go andwhat he will do it is doubtful whether even the President knows;certainly we don't know.
The only man who does know is Dr. Bull.
"Confound it!"
cried Syme.
"And we don't know where he is."
"Yes," said the other in his curious, absent-minded way, "I knowwhere he is myself."
"Will you tell me?"
asked Syme with eager eyes.
"I will take you there," said the Professor, and took down his ownhat from a peg.
Syme stood looking at him with a sort of rigid excitement.
"What do you mean?"
he asked sharply.
"Will you join me?
Will youtake the risk?"
"Young man," said the Professor pleasantly, "I am amused to observethat you think I am a coward.
As to that I will say only one word,and that shall be entirely in the manner of your own philosophicalrhetoric.
You think that it is possible to pull down the President.
I know that it is impossible, and I am going to try it," andopening the tavern door, which let in a blast of bitter air, theywent out together into the dark streets by the docks.
Most of the snow was melted or trampled to mud, but here and therea clot of it still showed grey rather than white in the gloom.
Thesmall streets were sloppy and full of pools, which reflected theflaming lamps irregularly, and by accident, like fragments of someother and fallen world.
Syme felt almost dazed as he steppedthrough this growing confusion of lights and shadows; but hiscompanion walked on with a certain briskness, towards where, atthe end of the street, an inch or two of the lamplit river lookedlike a bar of flame.
"Where are you going?"
Syme inquired.
"Just now," answered the Professor, "I am going just round thecorner to see whether Dr. Bull has gone to bed.
He is hygienic,and retires early."
"Dr.
Bull!"
exclaimed Syme.
"Does he live round the corner?"
"No," answered his friend.
"As a matter of fact he lives some wayoff, on the other side of the river, but we can tell from herewhether he has gone to bed."
Turning the corner as he spoke, and facing the dim river, fleckedwith flame, he pointed with his stick to the other bank.
On theSurrey side at this point there ran out into the Thames, seemingalmost to overhang it, a bulk and cluster of those tall tenements,dotted with lighted windows, and rising like factory chimneys toan almost insane height.
Their special poise and position made oneblock of buildings especially look like a Tower of Babel with ahundred eyes.
Syme had never seen any of the sky-scraping buildingsin America, so he could only think of the buildings in a dream.
Even as he stared, the highest light in this innumerably lightedturret abruptly went out, as if this black Argus had winked at himwith one of his innumerable eyes.
Professor de Worms swung round on his heel, and struck his stickagainst his boot.
"We are too late," he said, "the hygienic Doctor has gone to bed."
"What do you mean?"
asked Syme.
"Does he live over there, then?"
"Yes," said de Worms, "behind that particular window which youcan't see.
Come along and get some dinner.
We must call on himtomorrow morning."
Without further parley, he led the way through several by-waysuntil they came out into the flare and clamour of the East IndiaDock Road.
The Professor, who seemed to know his way about theneighbourhood, proceeded to a place where the line of lightedshops fell back into a sort of abrupt twilight and quiet, in whichan old white inn, all out of repair, stood back some twenty feetfrom the road.
"You can find good English inns left by accident everywhere, likefossils," explained the Professor.
"I once found a decent place inthe West End."
"I suppose," said Syme, smiling, "that this is the correspondingdecent place in the East End?"
"It is," said the Professor reverently, and went in.
In that place they dined and slept, both very thoroughly.
Thebeans and bacon, which these unaccountable people cooked well,the astonishing emergence of Burgundy from their cellars, crownedSyme's sense of a new comradeship and comfort.
Through all thisordeal his root horror had been isolation, and there are no wordsto express the abyss between isolation and having one ally.
It maybe conceded to the mathematicians that four is twice two.
But twois not twice one; two is two thousand times one.
That is why, inspite of a hundred disadvantages, the world will always return tomonogamy.
Syme was able to pour out for the first time the whole of hisoutrageous tale, from the time when Gregory had taken him tothe little tavern by the river.
He did it idly and amply, in aluxuriant monologue, as a man speaks with very old friends.
Onhis side, also, the man who had impersonated Professor de Wormswas not less communicative.
His own story was almost as silly asSyme's.
"That's a good get-up of yours," said Syme, draining a glass ofMacon; "a lot better than old Gogol's.
Even at the start I thoughthe was a bit too hairy."
"A difference of artistic theory," replied the Professor pensively.
"Gogol was an idealist.
He made up as the abstract or platonicideal of an anarchist.
But I am a realist.
I am a portrait painter.
But, indeed, to say that I am a portrait painter is an inadequateexpression.
I am a portrait."
"I don't understand you," said Syme.
"I am a portrait," repeated the Professor.
"I am a portrait of thecelebrated Professor de Worms, who is, I believe, in Naples."
"You mean you are made up like him," said Syme.
"But doesn't heknow that you are taking his nose in vain?"
"He knows it right enough," replied his friend cheerfully.
"Then why doesn't he denounce you?"
"I have denounced him," answered the Professor.
"Do explain yourself," said Syme.
"With pleasure, if you don't mind hearing my story," replied theeminent foreign philosopher.
"I am by profession an actor, and myname is Wilks.
When I was on the stage I mixed with all sorts ofBohemian and blackguard company.
Sometimes I touched the edge ofthe turf, sometimes the riff-raff of the arts, and occasionally thepolitical refugee.
In some den of exiled dreamers I was introducedto the great German Nihilist philosopher, Professor de Worms.
I didnot gather much about him beyond his appearance, which was verydisgusting, and which I studied carefully.
I understood that he hadproved that the destructive principle in the universe was God;hence he insisted on the need for a furious and incessant energy,rending all things in pieces.
Energy, he said, was the All.
He waslame, shortsighted, and partially paralytic.
When I met him I wasin a frivolous mood, and I disliked him so much that I resolved toimitate him.
If I had been a draughtsman I would have drawn acaricature.
I was only an actor, I could only act a caricature.
Imade myself up into what was meant for a wild exaggeration of theold Professor's dirty old self.
When I went into the room full ofhis supporters I expected to be received with a roar of laughter,or (if they were too far gone) with a roar of indignation at theinsult.
I cannot describe the surprise I felt when my entrance wasreceived with a respectful silence, followed (when I had firstopened my lips) with a murmur of admiration.
The curse of theperfect artist had fallen upon me.
I had been too subtle, I hadbeen too true.
They thought I really was the great NihilistProfessor.
I was a healthy-minded young man at the time, and Iconfess that it was a blow.
Before I could fully recover, however,two or three of these admirers ran up to me radiating indignation,and told me that a public insult had been put upon me in the nextroom.
I inquired its nature.
It seemed that an impertinent fellowhad dressed himself up as a preposterous parody of myself.
I haddrunk more champagne than was good for me, and in a flash of follyI decided to see the situation through.
Consequently it was to meetthe glare of the company and my own lifted eyebrows and freezingeyes that the real Professor came into the room.
"I need hardly say there was a collision.
The pessimists all roundme looked anxiously from one Professor to the other Professor tosee which was really the more feeble.
But I won.
An old man in poorhealth, like my rival, could not be expected to be so impressivelyfeeble as a young actor in the prime of life.
You see, he reallyhad paralysis, and working within this definite limitation, hecouldn't be so jolly paralytic as I was.
Then he tried to blast myclaims intellectually.
I countered that by a very simple dodge.
Whenever he said something that nobody but he could understand, Ireplied with something which I could not even understand myself.
'I don't fancy,' he said, 'that you could have worked out theprinciple that evolution is only negation, since there inheres init the introduction of lacuna, which are an essential ofdifferentiation.'
I replied quite scornfully, 'You read all that upin Pinckwerts; the notion that involution functioned eugenicallywas exposed long ago by Glumpe.'
It is unnecessary for me to saythat there never were such people as Pinckwerts and Glumpe.
But thepeople all round (rather to my surprise) seemed to remember themquite well, and the Professor, finding that the learned andmysterious method left him rather at the mercy of an enemy slightlydeficient in scruples, fell back upon a more popular form of wit.
'I see,' he sneered, 'you prevail like the false pig in Aesop.'
'And you fail,' I answered, smiling, 'like the hedgehog inMontaigne.'
Need I say that there is no hedgehog in Montaigne?
'Your claptrap comes off,' he said; 'so would your beard.'
I had nointelligent answer to this, which was quite true and rather witty.
But I laughed heartily, answered, 'Like the Pantheist's boots,' atrandom, and turned on my heel with all the honours of victory.
Thereal Professor was thrown out, but not with violence, though oneman tried very patiently to pull off his nose.
He is now, Ibelieve, received everywhere in Europe as a delightful impostor.
His apparent earnestness and anger, you see, make him all the moreentertaining."
"Well," said Syme, "I can understand your putting on his dirty oldbeard for a night's practical joke, but I don't understand yournever taking it off again."
"That is the rest of the story," said the impersonator.
"When Imyself left the company, followed by reverent applause, I wentlimping down the dark street, hoping that I should soon be farenough away to be able to walk like a human being.
To myastonishment, as I was turning the corner, I felt a touch on theshoulder, and turning, found myself under the shadow of an enormouspoliceman.
He told me I was wanted.
I struck a sort of paralyticattitude, and cried in a high German accent, 'Yes, I am wanted--bythe oppressed of the world.
You are arresting me on the charge ofbeing the great anarchist, Professor de Worms.'
The policemanimpassively consulted a paper in his hand, 'No, sir,' he saidcivilly, 'at least, not exactly, sir.
I am arresting you on thecharge of not being the celebrated anarchist, Professor de Worms.'
This charge, if it was criminal at all, was certainly the lighterof the two, and I went along with the man, doubtful, but notgreatly dismayed.
I was shown into a number of rooms, andeventually into the presence of a police officer, who explainedthat a serious campaign had been opened against the centres ofanarchy, and that this, my successful masquerade, might be ofconsiderable value to the public safety.
He offered me a goodsalary and this little blue card.
Though our conversation wasshort, he struck me as a man of very massive common sense andhumour; but I cannot tell you much about him personally, because--"Syme laid down his knife and fork.
"I know," he said, "because you talked to him in a dark room."
Professor de Worms nodded and drained his glass.
CHAPTER IXTHE MAN IN SPECTACLES"BURGUNDY is a jolly thing," said the Professor sadly, as he sethis glass down.
"You don't look as if it were," said Syme; "you drink it as if itwere medicine."
"You must excuse my manner," said the Professor dismally, "myposition is rather a curious one.
Inside I am really bursting withboyish merriment; but I acted the paralytic Professor so well, thatnow I can't leave off.
So that when I am among friends, and have noneed at all to disguise myself, I still can't help speaking slowand wrinkling my forehead--just as if it were my forehead.
I can bequite happy, you understand, but only in a paralytic sort of way.
The most buoyant exclamations leap up in my heart, but they comeout of my mouth quite different.
You should hear me say, 'Buck up,old cock!'
It would bring tears to your eyes."
"It does," said Syme; "but I cannot help thinking that apart fromall that you are really a bit worried."
The Professor started a little and looked at him steadily.
"You are a very clever fellow," he said, "it is a pleasure to workwith you.
Yes, I have rather a heavy cloud in my head.
There is agreat problem to face," and he sank his bald brow in his two hands.
Then he said in a low voice--"Can you play the piano?"
"Yes," said Syme in simple wonder, "I'm supposed to have a goodtouch."
Then, as the other did not speak, he added--"I trust the great cloud is lifted."
After a long silence, the Professor said out of the cavernousshadow of his hands--"It would have done just as well if you could work a typewriter."
"Thank you," said Syme, "you flatter me."
"Listen to me," said the other, "and remember whom we have to seetomorrow.
You and I are going tomorrow to attempt something whichis very much more dangerous than trying to steal the Crown Jewelsout of the Tower.
We are trying to steal a secret from a verysharp, very strong, and very wicked man.
I believe there is no man,except the President, of course, who is so seriously startling andformidable as that little grinning fellow in goggles.
He has notperhaps the white-hot enthusiasm unto death, the mad martyrdom foranarchy, which marks the Secretary.
But then that very fanaticismin the Secretary has a human pathos, and is almost a redeemingtrait.
But the little Doctor has a brutal sanity that is moreshocking than the Secretary's disease.
Don't you notice hisdetestable virility and vitality.
He bounces like an india-rubberball.
Depend on it, Sunday was not asleep (I wonder if he eversleeps?)
when he locked up all the plans of this outrage in theround, black head of Dr.
Bull."
"And you think," said Syme, "that this unique monster will besoothed if I play the piano to him?"
"Don't be an ass," said his mentor.
"I mentioned the piano becauseit gives one quick and independent fingers.
Syme, if we are to gothrough this interview and come out sane or alive, we must havesome code of signals between us that this brute will not see.
Ihave made a rough alphabetical cypher corresponding to the fivefingers--like this, see," and he rippled with his fingers on thewooden table--"B A D, bad, a word we may frequently require."
Syme poured himself out another glass of wine, and began to studythe scheme.
He was abnormally quick with his brains at puzzles,and with his hands at conjuring, and it did not take him long tolearn how he might convey simple messages by what would seem tobe idle taps upon a table or knee.
But wine and companionship hadalways the effect of inspiring him to a farcical ingenuity, andthe Professor soon found himself struggling with the too vastenergy of the new language, as it passed through the heated brainof Syme.
"We must have several word-signs," said Syme seriously--"words thatwe are likely to want, fine shades of meaning.
My favourite word is'coeval'.
What's yours?"
"Do stop playing the goat," said the Professor plaintively.
"Youdon't know how serious this is."
"'Lush' too," said Syme, shaking his head sagaciously, "we musthave 'lush'--word applied to grass, don't you know?"
"Do you imagine," asked the Professor furiously, "that we are goingto talk to Dr. Bull about grass?"
"There are several ways in which the subject could be approached,"said Syme reflectively, "and the word introduced without appearingforced.
We might say, 'Dr.
Bull, as a revolutionist, you rememberthat a tyrant once advised us to eat grass; and indeed many of us,looking on the fresh lush grass of summer"'"Do you understand," said the other, "that this is a tragedy?"
"Perfectly," replied Syme; "always be comic in a tragedy.
Whatthe deuce else can you do?
I wish this language of yours had awider scope.
I suppose we could not extend it from the fingersto the toes?
That would involve pulling off our boots and socksduring the conversation, which however unobtrusively performed--""Syme," said his friend with a stern simplicity, "go to bed!"
Syme, however, sat up in bed for a considerable time mastering thenew code.
He was awakened next morning while the east was stillsealed with darkness, and found his grey-bearded ally standing likea ghost beside his bed.
Syme sat up in bed blinking; then slowly collected his thoughts,threw off the bed-clothes, and stood up.
It seemed to him in somecurious way that all the safety and sociability of the night beforefell with the bedclothes off him, and he stood up in an air of colddanger.
He still felt an entire trust and loyalty towards hiscompanion; but it was the trust between two men going to thescaffold.
"Well," said Syme with a forced cheerfulness as he pulled on histrousers, "I dreamt of that alphabet of yours.
Did it take youlong to make it up?"
The Professor made no answer, but gazed in front of him with eyesthe colour of a wintry sea; so Syme repeated his question.
"I say, did it take you long to invent all this?
I'm consideredgood at these things, and it was a good hour's grind.
Did youlearn it all on the spot?"
The Professor was silent; his eyes were wide open, and he wore afixed but very small smile.
"How long did it take you?"
The Professor did not move.
"Confound you, can't you answer?"
called out Syme, in a suddenanger that had something like fear underneath.
Whether or no theProfessor could answer, he did not.
Syme stood staring back at the stiff face like parchment and theblank, blue eyes.
His first thought was that the Professor had gonemad, but his second thought was more frightful.
After all, what didhe know about this queer creature whom he had heedlessly acceptedas a friend?
What did he know, except that the man had been at theanarchist breakfast and had told him a ridiculous tale?
Howimprobable it was that there should be another friend there besideGogol!
Was this man's silence a sensational way of declaring war?
Was this adamantine stare after all only the awful sneer of somethreefold traitor, who had turned for the last time?
He stood andstrained his ears in this heartless silence.
He almost fancied hecould hear dynamiters come to capture him shifting softly in thecorridor outside.
Then his eye strayed downwards, and he burst out laughing.
Thoughthe Professor himself stood there as voiceless as a statue, hisfive dumb fingers were dancing alive upon the dead table.
Symewatched the twinkling movements of the talking hand, and readclearly the message--"I will only talk like this.
We must get used to it."
He rapped out the answer with the impatience of relief--"All right.
Let's get out to breakfast."
They took their hats and sticks in silence; but as Syme took hissword-stick, he held it hard.
They paused for a few minutes only to stuff down coffee and coarsethick sandwiches at a coffee stall, and then made their way acrossthe river, which under the grey and growing light looked asdesolate as Acheron.
They reached the bottom of the huge block ofbuildings which they had seen from across the river, and began insilence to mount the naked and numberless stone steps, only pausingnow and then to make short remarks on the rail of the banisters.
Atabout every other flight they passed a window; each window showedthem a pale and tragic dawn lifting itself laboriously over London.
From each the innumerable roofs of slate looked like the leadensurges of a grey, troubled sea after rain.
Syme was increasinglyconscious that his new adventure had somehow a quality of coldsanity worse than the wild adventures of the past.
Last night, forinstance, the tall tenements had seemed to him like a tower in adream.
As he now went up the weary and perpetual steps, he wasdaunted and bewildered by their almost infinite series.
But it wasnot the hot horror of a dream or of anything that might beexaggeration or delusion.
Their infinity was more like the emptyinfinity of arithmetic, something unthinkable, yet necessary tothought.
Or it was like the stunning statements of astronomy aboutthe distance of the fixed stars.
He was ascending the house ofreason, a thing more hideous than unreason itself.
By the time they reached Dr. Bull's landing, a last window showedthem a harsh, white dawn edged with banks of a kind of coarse red,more like red clay than red cloud.
And when they entered Dr. Bull'sbare garret it was full of light.
Syme had been haunted by a half historic memory in connection withthese empty rooms and that austere daybreak.
The moment he saw thegarret and Dr. Bull sitting writing at a table, he remembered whatthe memory was--the French Revolution.
There should have been theblack outline of a guillotine against that heavy red and white ofthe morning.
Dr. Bull was in his white shirt and black breechesonly; his cropped, dark head might well have just come out of itswig; he might have been Marat or a more slipshod Robespierre.
Yet when he was seen properly, the French fancy fell away.
TheJacobins were idealists; there was about this man a murderousmaterialism.
His Dosition gave him a somewhat new appearance.
Thestrong, white light of morning coming from one side creating sharpshadows, made him seem both more pale and more angular than he hadlooked at the breakfast on the balcony.
Thus the two black glassesthat encased his eyes might really have been black cavities in hisskull, making him look like a death's-head.
And, indeed, if everDeath himself sat writing at a wooden table, it might have been he.
He looked up and smiled brightly enough as the men came in, androse with the resilient rapidity of which the Professor hadspoken.
He set chairs for both of them, and going to a peg behindthe door, proceeded to put on a coat and waistcoat of rough, darktweed; he buttoned it up neatly, and came back to sit down at histable.
The quiet good humour of his manner left his two opponentshelpless.
It was with some momentary difficulty that theProfessor broke silence and began, "I'm sorry to disturb you soearly, comrade," said he, with a careful resumption of the slowde Worms manner.
"You have no doubt made all the arrangements forthe Paris affair?"
Then he added with infinite slowness, "We haveinformation which renders intolerable anything in the nature of amoment's delay."
Dr. Bull smiled again, but continued to gaze on them withoutspeaking.
The Professor resumed, a pause before each weary word--"Please do not think me excessively abrupt; but I advise you toalter those plans, or if it is too late for that, to follow youragent with all the support you can get for him.
Comrade Syme andI have had an experience which it would take more time to recountthan we can afford, if we are to act on it.
I will, however,relate the occurrence in detail, even at the risk of losing time,if you really feel that it is essential to the understanding ofthe problem we have to discuss."
He was spinning out his sentences, making them intolerably longand lingering, in the hope of maddening the practical littleDoctor into an explosion of impatience which might show his hand.
But the little Doctor continued only to stare and smile, and themonologue was uphill work.
Syme began to feel a new sickness anddespair.
The Doctor's smile and silence were not at all like thecataleptic stare and horrible silence which he had confronted inthe Professor half an hour before.
About the Professor's makeupand all his antics there was always something merely grotesque,like a gollywog.
Syme remembered those wild woes of yesterday asone remembers being afraid of Bogy in childhood.
But here wasdaylight; here was a healthy, square-shouldered man in tweeds,not odd save for the accident of his ugly spectacles, not glaringor grinning at all, but smiling steadily and not saying a word.
The whole had a sense of unbearable reality.
Under the increasingsunlight the colours of the Doctor's complexion, the pattern ofhis tweeds, grew and expanded outrageously, as such things growtoo important in a realistic novel.
But his smile was quiteslight, the pose of his head polite; the only uncanny thing washis silence.
"As I say," resumed the Professor, like a man toiling throughheavy sand, "the incident that has occurred to us and has ledus to ask for information about the Marquis, is one which youmay think it better to have narrated; but as it came in theway of Comrade Syme rather than me--"His words he seemed to be dragging out like words in an anthem;but Syme, who was watching, saw his long fingers rattle quicklyon the edge of the crazy table.
He read the message, "You mustgo on.
This devil has sucked me dry!"
Syme plunged into the breach with that bravado of improvisationwhich always came to him when he was alarmed.
"Yes, the thing really happened to me," he said hastily.
"I hadthe good fortune to fall into conversation with a detective whotook me, thanks to my hat, for a respectable person.
Wishing toclinch my reputation for respectability, I took him and made himvery drunk at the Savoy.
Under this influence he became friendly,and told me in so many words that within a day or two they hopeto arrest the Marquis in France.
So unless you or I can get on his track--"The Doctor was still smiling in the most friendly way, and hisprotected eyes were still impenetrable.
The Professor signalled toSyme that he would resume his explanation, and he began again withthe same elaborate calm.
"Syme immediately brought this information to me, and we came heretogether to see what use you would be inclined to make of it.
Itseems to me unquestionably urgent that--"All this time Syme had been staring at the Doctor almost assteadily as the Doctor stared at the Professor, but quite withoutthe smile.
The nerves of both comrades-in-arms were near snappingunder that strain of motionless amiability, when Syme suddenlyleant forward and idly tapped the edge of the table.
His messageto his ally ran, "I have an intuition."
The Professor, with scarcely a pause in his monologue, signalledback, "Then sit on it."
Syme telegraphed, "It is quite extraordinary."
The other answered, "Extraordinary rot!"
Syme said, "I am a poet."
The other retorted, "You are a dead man."
Syme had gone quite red up to his yellow hair, and his eyes wereburning feverishly.
As he said he had an intuition, and it hadrisen to a sort of lightheaded certainty.
Resuming his symbolictaps, he signalled to his friend, "You scarcely realise how poeticmy intuition is.
It has that sudden quality we sometimes feel inthe coming of spring."
He then studied the answer on his friend's fingers.
The answerwas, "Go to hell! "
The Professor then resumed his merely verbal monologue addressedto the Doctor.
"Perhaps I should rather say," said Syme on his fingers, "that itresembles that sudden smell of the sea which may be found in theheart of lush woods."
His companion disdained to reply.
"Or yet again," tapped Syme, "it is positive, as is the passionatered hair of a beautiful woman."
The Professor was continuing his speech, but in the middle of itSyme decided to act.
He leant across the table, and said in avoice that could not be neglected--"Dr.
Bull!"
The Doctor's sleek and smiling head did not move, but they couldhave sworn that under his dark glasses his eyes darted towardsSyme.
"Dr. Bull," said Syme, in a voice peculiarly precise andcourteous, "would you do me a small favour?
Would you be so kindas to take off your spectacles?"
The Professor swung round on his seat, and stared at Syme with asort of frozen fury of astonishment.
Syme, like a man who hasthrown his life and fortune on the table, leaned forward with afiery face.
The Doctor did not move.
For a few seconds there was a silence in which one could hear apin drop, split once by the single hoot of a distant steamer onthe Thames.
Then Dr. Bull rose slowly, still smiling, and tookoff his spectacles.
Syme sprang to his feet, stepping backwards a little, like achemical lecturer from a successful explosion.
His eyes were likestars, and for an instant he could only point without speaking.
The Professor had also started to his feet, forgetful of hissupposed paralysis.
He leant on the back of the chair and stareddoubtfully at Dr. Bull, as if the Doctor had been turned into atoad before his eyes.
And indeed it was almost as great atransformation scene.
The two detectives saw sitting in the chair before them a veryboyish-looking young man, with very frank and happy hazel eyes, anopen expression, cockney clothes like those of a city clerk, andan unquestionable breath about him of being very good and rathercommonplace.
The smile was still there, but it might have been thefirst smile of a baby.
"I knew I was a poet," cried Syme in a sort of ecstasy.
"I knew myintuition was as infallible as the Pope.
It was the spectacles thatdid it!
It was all the spectacles.
Given those beastly black eyes,and all the rest of him his health and his jolly looks, made him alive devil among dead ones."
"It certainly does make a queer difference," said the Professorshakily.
"But as regards the project of Dr. Bull--""Project be damned!"
roared Syme, beside himself.
"Look at him!
Look at his face, look at his collar, look at his blessed boots!
You don't suppose, do you, that that thing's an anarchist?"
"Syme!"
cried the other in an apprehensive agony.
"Why, by God," said Syme, "I'll take the risk of that myself!
Dr.Bull, I am a police officer.
There's my card," and he flung downthe blue card upon the table.
The Professor still feared that all was lost; but he was loyal.
Hepulled out his own official card and put it beside his friend's.
Then the third man burst out laughing, and for the first time thatmorning they heard his voice.
"I'm awfully glad you chaps have come so early," he said, witha sort of schoolboy flippancy, "for we can all start for Francetogether.
Yes, I'm in the force right enough," and he flicked ablue card towards them lightly as a matter of form.
Clapping a brisk bowler on his head and resuming his goblinglasses, the Doctor moved so quickly towards the door, that theothers instinctively followed him.
Syme seemed a little distrait,and as he passed under the doorway he suddenly struck his stickon the stone passage so that it rang.
"But Lord God Almighty," he cried out, "if this is all right, therewere more damned detectives than there were damned dynamiters atthe damned Council!"
"We might have fought easily," said Bull; "we were four againstthree."
The Professor was descending the stairs, but his voice came up frombelow.
"No," said the voice, "we were not four against three--we were notso lucky.
We were four against One."
The others went down the stairs in silence.
The young man called Bull, with an innocent courtesy characteristicof him, insisted on going last until they reached the street; butthere his own robust rapidity asserted itself unconsciously, and hewalked quickly on ahead towards a railway inquiry office, talkingto the others over his shoulder.
"It is jolly to get some pals," he said.
"I've been half dead withthe jumps, being quite alone.
I nearly flung my arms round Gogoland embraced him, which would have been imprudent.
I hope you won'tdespise me for having been in a blue funk."
"All the blue devils in blue hell," said Syme, "contributed to myblue funk!
But the worst devil was you and your infernal goggles."
The young man laughed delightedly.
"Wasn't it a rag?"
he said.
"Such a simple idea--not my own.
Ihaven't got the brains.
You see, I wanted to go into the detectiveservice, especially the anti-dynamite business.
But for thatpurpose they wanted someone to dress up as a dynamiter; and theyall swore by blazes that I could never look like a dynamiter.
Theysaid my very walk was respectable, and that seen from behind Ilooked like the British Constitution.
They said I looked toohealthy and too optimistic, and too reliable and benevolent; theycalled me all sorts of names at Scotland Yard.
They said that if Ihad been a criminal, I might have made my fortune by looking solike an honest man; but as I had the misfortune to be an honestman, there was not even the remotest chance of my assisting them byever looking like a criminal.
But as last I was brought before someold josser who was high up in the force, and who seemed to have noend of a head on his shoulders.
And there the others all talkedhopelessly.
One asked whether a bushy beard would hide my nicesmile; another said that if they blacked my face I might look likea negro anarchist; but this old chap chipped in with a mostextraordinary remark.
'A pair of smoked spectacles will do it,' hesaid positively.
'Look at him now; he looks like an angelic officeboy.
Put him on a pair of smoked spectacles, and children willscream at the sight of him.'
And so it was, by George!
When once myeyes were covered, all the rest, smile and big shoulders and shorthair, made me look a perfect little devil.
As I say, it was simpleenough when it was done, like miracles; but that wasn't the reallymiraculous part of it.
There was one really staggering thing aboutthe business, and my head still turns at it."
"What was that?"
asked Syme.
"I'll tell you," answered the man in spectacles.
"This big pot inthe police who sized me up so that he knew how the goggles wouldgo with my hair and socks--by God, he never saw me at all!"
Syme's eyes suddenly flashed on him.
"How was that?"
he asked.
"I thought you talked to him."
"So I did," said Bull brightly; "but we talked in a pitch-darkroom like a coalcellar.
There, you would never have guessed that."
"I could not have conceived it," said Syme gravely.
"It is indeed a new idea," said the Professor.
Their new ally was in practical matters a whirlwind.
At theinquiry office he asked with businesslike brevity about the trainsfor Dover.
Having got his information, he bundled the company intoa cab, and put them and himself inside a railway carriage beforethey had properly realised the breathless process.
They werealready on the Calais boat before conversation flowed freely.
"I had already arranged," he explained, "to go to France for mylunch; but I am delighted to have someone to lunch with me.
Yousee, I had to send that beast, the Marquis, over with his bomb,because the President had his eye on me, though God knows how.
I'll tell you the story some day.
It was perfectly choking.
Whenever I tried to slip out of it I saw the President somewhere,smiling out of the bow-window of a club, or taking off his hat tome from the top of an omnibus.
I tell you, you can say what youlike, that fellow sold himself to the devil; he can be in sixplaces at once."
"So you sent the Marquis off, I understand," asked the Professor.
"Was it long ago?
Shall we be in time to catch him?"
"Yes," answered the new guide, "I've timed it all.
He'll still beat Calais when we arrive."
"But when we do catch him at Calais," said the Professor, "what arewe going to do?"
At this question the countenance of Dr. Bull fell for the firsttime.
He reflected a little, and then said--"Theoretically, I suppose, we ought to call the police."
"Not I," said Syme.
"Theoretically I ought to drown myself first.
Ipromised a poor fellow, who was a real modern pessimist, on my wordof honour not to tell the police.
I'm no hand at casuistry, but Ican't break my word to a modern pessimist.
It's like breaking one'sword to a child."
"I'm in the same boat," said the Professor.
"I tried to tell thepolice and I couldn't, because of some silly oath I took.
You see,when I was an actor I was a sort of all-round beast.
Perjury ortreason is the only crime I haven't committed.
If I did that Ishouldn't know the difference between right and wrong."
"I've been through all that," said Dr. Bull, "and I've made up mymind.
I gave my promise to the Secretary--you know him, man whosmiles upside down.
My friends, that man is the most utterlyunhappy man that was ever human.
It may be his digestion, or hisconscience, or his nerves, or his philosophy of the universe, buthe's damned, he's in hell!
Well, I can't turn on a man like that,and hunt him down.
It's like whipping a leper.
I may be mad, butthat's how I feel; and there's jolly well the end of it."
"I don't think you're mad," said Syme.
"I knew you would decidelike that when first you--""Eh?"
said Dr. Bull.
"When first you took off your spectacles."
Dr. Bull smiled a little, and strolled across the deck to look atthe sunlit sea.
Then he strolled back again, kicking his heelscarelessly, and a companionable silence fell between the three men.
"Well," said Syme, "it seems that we have all the same kind ofmorality or immorality, so we had better face the fact that comesof it."
"Yes," assented the Professor, "you're quite right; and we musthurry up, for I can see the Grey Nose standing out from France."
"The fact that comes of it," said Syme seriously, "is this, that wethree are alone on this planet.
Gogol has gone, God knows where;perhaps the President has smashed him like a fly.
On the Council weare three men against three, like the Romans who held the bridge.
But we are worse off than that, first because they can appeal totheir organization and we cannot appeal to ours, and secondbecause--""Because one of those other three men," said the Professor, "is nota man."
Syme nodded and was silent for a second or two, then he said--"My idea is this.
We must do something to keep the Marquis inCalais till tomorrow midday.
I have turned over twenty schemes inmy head.
We cannot denounce him as a dynamiter; that is agreed.
Wecannot get him detained on some trivial charge, for we should haveto appear; he knows us, and he would smell a rat.
We cannot pretendto keep him on anarchist business; he might swallow much in thatway, but not the notion of stopping in Calais while the Czar wentsafely through Paris.
We might try to kidnap him, and lock him upourselves; but he is a well-known man here.
He has a wholebodyguard of friends; he is very strong and brave, and the event isdoubtful.
The only thing I can see to do is actually to takeadvantage of the very things that are in the Marquis's favour.
I amgoing to profit by the fact that he is a highly respected nobleman.
I am going to profit by the fact that he has many friends and movesin the best society."
"What the devil are you talking about?"
asked the Professor.
"The Symes are first mentioned in the fourteenth century," saidSyme; "but there is a tradition that one of them rode behind Bruceat Bannockburn.
Since 1350 the tree is quite clear."
"He's gone off his head," said the little Doctor, staring.
"Our bearings," continued Syme calmly, "are 'argent a chevron gulescharged with three cross crosslets of the field.'
The mottovaries."
The Professor seized Syme roughly by the waistcoat.
"We are just inshore," he said.
"Are you seasick or joking in thewrong place?"
"My remarks are almost painfully practical," answered Syme, in anunhurried manner.
"The house of St. Eustache also is very ancient.
The Marquis cannot deny that he is a gentleman.
He cannot denythat I am a gentleman.
And in order to put the matter of my socialposition quite beyond a doubt, I propose at the earliestopportunity to knock his hat off.
But here we are in the harbour."
They went on shore under the strong sun in a sort of daze.
Syme,who had now taken the lead as Bull had taken it in London, ledthem along a kind of marine parade until he came to some cafes,embowered in a bulk of greenery and overlooking the sea.
As hewent before them his step was slightly swaggering, and he swunghis stick like a sword.
He was making apparently for the extremeend of the line of cafes, but he stopped abruptly.
With a sharpgesture he motioned them to silence, but he pointed with onegloved finger to a cafe table under a bank of flowering foliageat which sat the Marquis de St. Eustache, his teeth shining inhis thick, black beard, and his bold, brown face shadowed by alight yellow straw hat and outlined against the violet sea.
CHAPTER XTHE DUELSYME sat down at a cafe table with his companions, his blue eyessparkling like the bright sea below, and ordered a bottle ofSaumur with a pleased impatience.
He was for some reason in acondition of curious hilarity.
His spirits were alreadyunnaturally high; they rose as the Saumur sank, and in half anhour his talk was a torrent of nonsense.
He professed to bemaking out a plan of the conversation which was going to ensuebetween himself and the deadly Marquis.
He jotted it down wildlywith a pencil.
It was arranged like a printed catechism, withquestions and answers, and was delivered with an extraordinaryrapidity of utterance.
"I shall approach.
Before taking off his hat, I shall take off myown.
I shall say, 'The Marquis de Saint Eustache, I believe.'
Hewill say, 'The celebrated Mr. Syme, I presume.'
He will say in themost exquisite French, 'How are you?'
I shall reply in the mostexquisite Cockney, 'Oh, just the Syme--' ""Oh, shut it," said the man in spectacles.
"Pull yourselftogether, and chuck away that bit of paper.
What are you reallygoing to do?"
"But it was a lovely catechism," said Syme pathetically.
"Do letme read it you.
It has only forty-three questions and answers, andsome of the Marquis's answers are wonderfully witty.
I like to bejust to my enemy."
"But what's the good of it all?"
asked Dr. Bull in exasperation.
"It leads up to my challenge, don't you see," said Syme, beaming.
"When the Marquis has given the thirty-ninth reply, which runs--""Has it by any chance occurred to you," asked the Professor, witha ponderous simplicity, "that the Marquis may not say all theforty-three things you have put down for him?
In that case, Iunderstand, your own epigrams may appear somewhat more forced."
Syme struck the table with a radiant face.
"Why, how true that is," he said, "and I never thought of it.
Sir,you have an intellect beyond the common.
You will make a name."
"Oh, you're as drunk as an owl!"
said the Doctor.
"It only remains," continued Syme quite unperturbed, "to adoptsome other method of breaking the ice (if I may so express it)between myself and the man I wish to kill.
And since the course ofa dialogue cannot be predicted by one of its parties alone (as youhave pointed out with such recondite acumen), the only thing to bedone, I suppose, is for the one party, as far as possible, to doall the dialogue by himself.
And so I will, by George!"
And hestood up suddenly, his yellow hair blowing in the slight seabreeze.
A band was playing in a cafe chantant hidden somewhere among thetrees, and a woman had just stopped singing.
On Syme's heated headthe bray of the brass band seemed like the jar and jingle of thatbarrel-organ in Leicester Square, to the tune of which he had oncestood up to die.
He looked across to the little table where theMarquis sat.
The man had two companions now, solemn Frenchmen infrock-coats and silk hats, one of them with the red rosette of theLegion of Honour, evidently people of a solid social position.
Besides these black, cylindrical costumes, the Marquis, in hisloose straw hat and light spring clothes, looked Bohemian and evenbarbaric; but he looked the Marquis.
Indeed, one might say that helooked the king, with his animal elegance, his scornful eyes, andhis proud head lifted against the purple sea.
But he was noChristian king, at any rate; he was, rather, some swarthy despot,half Greek, half Asiatic, who in the days when slavery seemednatural looked down on the Mediterranean, on his galley and hisgroaning slaves.
Just so, Syme thought, would the brown-gold faceof such a tyrant have shown against the dark green olives and theburning blue.
"Are you going to address the meeting?"
asked the Professorpeevishly, seeing that Syme still stood up without moving.
Syme drained his last glass of sparkling wine.
"I am," he said, pointing across to the Marquis and his companions,"that meeting.
That meeting displeases me.
I am going to pull thatmeeting's great ugly, mahogany-coloured nose."
He stepped across swiftly, if not quite steadily.
The Marquis,seeing him, arched his black Assyrian eyebrows in surprise, butsmiled politely.
"You are Mr. Syme, I think," he said.
Syme bowed.
"And you are the Marquis de Saint Eustache," he said gracefully.
"Permit me to pull your nose."
He leant over to do so, but the Marquis started backwards,upsetting his chair, and the two men in top hats held Syme backby the shoulders.
"This man has insulted me!"
said Syme, with gestures ofexplanation.
"Insulted you?"
cried the gentleman with the red rosette, "when?"
"Oh, just now," said Syme recklessly.
"He insulted my mother."
"Insulted your mother!"
exclaimed the gentleman incredulously.
"Well, anyhow," said Syme, conceding a point, "my aunt."
"But how can the Marquis have insulted your aunt just now?"
saidthe second gentleman with some legitimate wonder.
"He has beensitting here all the time."
"Ah, it was what he said!"
said Syme darkly.
"I said nothing at all," said the Marquis, "except somethingabout the band.
I only said that I liked Wagner played well."
"It was an allusion to my family," said Syme firmly.
"My auntplayed Wagner badly.
It was a painful subject.
We are alwaysbeing insulted about it."
"This seems most extraordinary," said the gentleman who wasdecore, looking doubtfully at the Marquis.
"Oh, I assure you," said Syme earnestly, "the whole of yourconversation was simply packed with sinister allusions to myaunt's weaknesses."
"This is nonsense!"
said the second gentleman.
"I for one havesaid nothing for half an hour except that I liked the singing ofthat girl with black hair."
"Well, there you are again!"
said Syme indignantly.
"My aunt's wasred."
"It seems to me," said the other, "that you are simply seeking apretext to insult the Marquis."
"By George!"
said Syme, facing round and looking at him, "what aclever chap you are!"
The Marquis started up with eyes flaming like a tiger's.
"Seeking a quarrel with me!"
he cried.
"Seeking a fight with me!
ByGod!
there was never a man who had to seek long.
These gentlemenwill perhaps act for me.
There are still four hours of daylight.
Let us fight this evening."
Syme bowed with a quite beautiful graciousness.
"Marquis," he said, "your action is worthy of your fame and blood.
Permit me to consult for a moment with the gentlemen in whosehands I shall place myself."
In three long strides he rejoined his companions, and they, whohad seen his champagne-inspired attack and listened to his idioticexplanations, were quite startled at the look of him.
For now thathe came back to them he was quite sober, a little pale, and hespoke in a low voice of passionate practicality.
"I have done it," he said hoarsely.
"I have fixed a fight on thebeast.
But look here, and listen carefully.
There is no time fortalk.
You are my seconds, and everything must come from you.
Nowyou must insist, and insist absolutely, on the duel coming offafter seven tomorrow, so as to give me the chance of preventing himfrom catching the 7.45 for Paris.
If he misses that he misses hiscrime.
He can't refuse to meet you on such a small point of timeand place.
But this is what he will do.
He will choose a fieldsomewhere near a wayside station, where he can pick up the train.
He is a very good swordsman, and he will trust to killing me intime to catch it.
But I can fence well too, and I think I can keephim in play, at any rate, until the train is lost.
Then perhaps hemay kill me to console his feelings.
You understand?
Very wellthen, let me introduce you to some charming friends of mine," andleading them quickly across the parade, he presented them to theMarquis's seconds by two very aristocratic names of which they hadnot previously heard.
Syme was subject to spasms of singular common sense, not otherwisea part of his character.
They were (as he said of his impulse aboutthe spectacles) poetic intuitions, and they sometimes rose to theexaltation of prophecy.
He had correctly calculated in this case the policy of hisopponent.
When the Marquis was informed by his seconds that Symecould only fight in the morning, he must fully have realised thatan obstacle had suddenly arisen between him and his bomb-throwingbusiness in the capital.
Naturally he could not explain thisobjection to his friends, so he chose the course which Syme hadpredicted.
He induced his seconds to settle on a small meadow notfar from the railway, and he trusted to the fatality of the firstengagement.
When he came down very coolly to the field of honour, no one couldhave guessed that he had any anxiety about a journey; his handswere in his pockets, his straw hat on the back of his head, hishandsome face brazen in the sun.
But it might have struck astranger as odd that there appeared in his train, not only hisseconds carrying the sword-case, but two of his servants carryinga portmanteau and a luncheon basket.
Early as was the hour, the sun soaked everything in warmth, andSyme was vaguely surprised to see so many spring flowers burninggold and silver in the tall grass in which the whole company stoodalmost knee-deep.
With the exception of the Marquis, all the men were in sombre andsolemn morning-dress, with hats like black chimney-pots; the littleDoctor especially, with the addition of his black spectacles,looked like an undertaker in a farce.
Syme could not help feeling acomic contrast between this funereal church parade of apparel andthe rich and glistening meadow, growing wild flowers everywhere.
But, indeed, this comic contrast between the yellow blossoms andthe black hats was but a symbol of the tragic contrast between theyellow blossoms and the black business.
On his right was a littlewood; far away to his left lay the long curve of the railway line,which he was, so to speak, guarding from the Marquis, whose goaland escape it was.
In front of him, behind the black group of hisopponents, he could see, like a tinted cloud, a small almond bushin flower against the faint line of the sea.
The member of the Legion of Honour, whose name it seemed wasColonel Ducroix, approached the Professor and Dr. Bull with greatpoliteness, and suggested that the play should terminate with thefirst considerable hurt.
Dr. Bull, however, having been carefully coached by Syme upon thispoint of policy, insisted, with great dignity and in very badFrench, that it should continue until one of the combatants wasdisabled.
Syme had made up his mind that he could avoid disablingthe Marquis and prevent the Marquis from disabling him for atleast twenty minutes.
In twenty minutes the Paris train would havegone by.
"To a man of the well-known skill and valour of Monsieur de St.Eustache," said the Professor solemnly, "it must be a matter ofindifference which method is adopted, and our principal has strongreasons for demanding the longer encounter, reasons the delicacyof which prevent me from being explicit, but for the just andhonourable nature of which I can--""Peste!"
broke from the Marquis behind, whose face had suddenlydarkened, "let us stop talking and begin," and he slashed off thehead of a tall flower with his stick.
Syme understood his rude impatience and instinctively looked overhis shoulder to see whether the train was coming in sight.
Butthere was no smoke on the horizon.
Colonel Ducroix knelt down and unlocked the case, taking out apair of twin swords, which took the sunlight and turned to twostreaks of white fire.
He offered one to the Marquis, who snatchedit without ceremony, and another to Syme, who took it, bent it,and poised it with as much delay as was consistent with dignity.
Then the Colonel took out another pair of blades, and taking onehimself and giving another to Dr. Bull, proceeded to place themen.
Both combatants had thrown off their coats and waistcoats, andstood sword in hand.
The seconds stood on each side of the lineof fight with drawn swords also, but still sombre in their darkfrock-coats and hats.
The principals saluted.
The Colonel saidquietly, "Engage!"
and the two blades touched and tingled.
When the jar of the joined iron ran up Syme's arm, all thefantastic fears that have been the subject of this story fellfrom him like dreams from a man waking up in bed.
He rememberedthem clearly and in order as mere delusions of the nerves--howthe fear of the Professor had been the fear of the tyrannicaccidents of nightmare, and how the fear of the Doctor had beenthe fear of the airless vacuum of science.
The first was the oldfear that any miracle might happen, the second the more hopelessmodern fear that no miracle can ever happen.
But he saw thatthese fears were fancies, for he found himself in the presence ofthe great fact of the fear of death, with its coarse and pitilesscommon sense.
He felt like a man who had dreamed all night offalling over precipices, and had woke up on the morning when hewas to be hanged.
For as soon as he had seen the sunlight rundown the channel of his foe's foreshortened blade, and as soon ashe had felt the two tongues of steel touch, vibrating like twoliving things, he knew that his enemy was a terrible fighter, andthat probably his last hour had come.
He felt a strange and vivid value in all the earth around him, inthe grass under his feet; he felt the love of life in all livingthings.
He could almost fancy that he heard the grass growing; hecould almost fancy that even as he stood fresh flowers werespringing up and breaking into blossom in the meadow--flowers bloodred and burning gold and blue, fulfilling the whole pageant of thespring.
And whenever his eyes strayed for a flash from the calm,staring, hypnotic eyes of the Marquis, they saw the little tuft ofalmond tree against the sky-line.
He had the feeling that if bysome miracle he escaped he would be ready to sit for ever beforethat almond tree, desiring nothing else in the world.
But while earth and sky and everything had the living beauty of athing lost, the other half of his head was as clear as glass, andhe was parrying his enemy's point with a kind of clockwork skill ofwhich he had hardly supposed himself capable.
Once his enemy'spoint ran along his wrist, leaving a slight streak of blood, but iteither was not noticed or was tacitly ignored.
Every now and thenhe riposted, and once or twice he could almost fancy that he felthis point go home, but as there was no blood on blade or shirt hesupposed he was mistaken.
Then came an interruption and a change.
At the risk of losing all, the Marquis, interrupting his quietstare, flashed one glance over his shoulder at the line of railwayon his right.
Then he turned on Syme a face transfigured to that ofa fiend, and began to fight as if with twenty weapons.
The attackcame so fast and furious, that the one shining sword seemed ashower of shining arrows.
Syme had no chance to look at therailway; but also he had no need.
He could guess the reason of theMarquis's sudden madness of battle--the Paris train was in sight.
But the Marquis's morbid energy over-reached itself.
Twice Syme,parrying, knocked his opponent's point far out of the fightingcircle; and the third time his riposte was so rapid, that therewas no doubt about the hit this time.
Syme's sword actually bentunder the weight of the Marquis's body, which it had pierced.
Syme was as certain that he had stuck his blade into his enemy asa gardener that he has stuck his spade into the ground.
Yet theMarquis sprang back from the stroke without a stagger, and Symestood staring at his own sword-point like an idiot.
There was noblood on it at all.
There was an instant of rigid silence, and then Syme in his turnfell furiously on the other, filled with a flaming curiosity.
TheMarquis was probably, in a general sense, a better fencer than he,as he had surmised at the beginning, but at the moment the Marquisseemed distraught and at a disadvantage.
He fought wildly and evenweakly, and he constantly looked away at the railway line, almostas if he feared the train more than the pointed steel.
Syme, on theother hand, fought fiercely but still carefully, in an intellectualfury, eager to solve the riddle of his own bloodless sword.
Forthis purpose, he aimed less at the Marquis's body, and more at histhroat and head.
A minute and a half afterwards he felt his pointenter the man's neck below the jaw.
It came out clean.
Half mad, hethrust again, and made what should have been a bloody scar on theMarquis's cheek.
But there was no scar.
For one moment the heaven of Syme again grew black withsupernatural terrors.
Surely the man had a charmed life.
But thisnew spiritual dread was a more awful thing than had been the merespiritual topsy-turvydom symbolised by the paralytic who pursuedhim.
The Professor was only a goblin; this man was a devil--perhapshe was the Devil!
Anyhow, this was certain, that three times had ahuman sword been driven into him and made no mark.
When Syme hadthat thought he drew himself up, and all that was good in him sanghigh up in the air as a high wind sings in the trees.
He thought ofall the human things in his story--of the Chinese lanterns inSaffron Park, of the girl's red hair in the garden, of the honest,beer-swilling sailors down by the dock, of his loyal companionsstanding by.
Perhaps he had been chosen as a champion of all thesefresh and kindly things to cross swords with the enemy of allcreation.
"After all," he said to himself, "I am more than a devil;I am a man.
I can do the one thing which Satan himself cannot do--Ican die," and as the word went through his head, he heard a faintand far-off hoot, which would soon be the roar of the Paris train.
He fell to fighting again with a supernatural levity, like aMohammedan panting for Paradise.
As the train came nearer andnearer he fancied he could see people putting up the floralarches in Paris; he joined in the growing noise and the glory ofthe great Republic whose gate he was guarding against Hell.
Histhoughts rose higher and higher with the rising roar of thetrain, which ended, as if proudly, in a long and piercingwhistle.
The train stopped.
Suddenly, to the astonishment of everyone the Marquis sprang backquite out of sword reach and threw down his sword.
The leap waswonderful, and not the less wonderful because Syme had plunged hissword a moment before into the man's thigh.
"Stop!"
said the Marquis in a voice that compelled a momentaryobedience.
"I want to say something."
"What is the matter?"
asked Colonel Ducroix, staring.
"Has therebeen foul play?"
"There has been foul play somewhere," said Dr. Bull, who was alittle pale.
"Our principal has wounded the Marquis four timesat least, and he is none the worse ."
The Marquis put up his hand with a curious air of ghastlypatience.
"Please let me speak," he said.
"It is rather important.
Mr.Syme," he continued, turning to his opponent, "we are fightingtoday, if I remember right, because you expressed a wish (whichI thought irrational) to pull my nose.
Would you oblige me bypulling my nose now as quickly as possible?
I have to catch atrain."
"I protest that this is most irregular," said Dr. Bullindignantly.
"It is certainly somewhat opposed to precedent," said ColonelDucroix, looking wistfully at his principal.
"There is, I think,one case on record (Captain Bellegarde and the Baron Zumpt) inwhich the weapons were changed in the middle of the encounter atthe request of one of the combatants.
But one can hardly callone's nose a weapon."
"Will you or will you not pull my nose?"
said the Marquis inexasperation.
"Come, come, Mr. Syme!
You wanted to do it, do it!
You can have no conception of how important it is to me.
Don't beso selfish!
Pull my nose at once, when I ask you!"
and he bentslightly forward with a fascinating smile.
The Paris train,panting and groaning, had grated into a little station behind theneighbouring hill.
Syme had the feeling he had more than once had in these adventures--the sense that a horrible and sublime wave lifted to heaven wasjust toppling over.
Walking in a world he half understood, he tooktwo paces forward and seized the Roman nose of this remarkablenobleman.
He pulled it hard, and it came off in his hand.
He stood for some seconds with a foolish solemnity, with thepasteboard proboscis still between his fingers, looking at it,while the sun and the clouds and the wooded hills looked downupon this imbecile scene.
The Marquis broke the silence in a loud and cheerful voice.
"If anyone has any use for my left eyebrow," he said, "he can haveit.
Colonel Ducroix, do accept my left eyebrow!
It's the kind ofthing that might come in useful any day," and he gravely tore offone of his swarthy Assyrian brows, bringing about half his brownforehead with it, and politely offered it to the Colonel, whostood crimson and speechless with rage.
"If I had known," he spluttered, "that I was acting for a poltroonwho pads himself to fight--""Oh, I know, I know!"
said the Marquis, recklessly throwing variousparts of himself right and left about the field.
"You are making amistake; but it can't be explained just now.
I tell you the trainhas come into the station!"
"Yes," said Dr. Bull fiercely, "and the train shall go out of thestation.
It shall go out without you.
We know well enough for whatdevil's work--"The mysterious Marquis lifted his hands with a desperate gesture.
He was a strange scarecrow standing there in the sun with half hisold face peeled off, and half another face glaring and grinningfrom underneath.
"Will you drive me mad?"
he cried.
"The train--""You shall not go by the train," said Syme firmly, and grasped hissword.
The wild figure turned towards Syme, and seemed to be gatheringitself for a sublime effort before speaking.
"You great fat, blasted, blear-eyed, blundering, thundering,brainless, Godforsaken, doddering, damned fool!"
he said withouttaking breath.
"You great silly, pink-faced, towheaded turnip!
You--""You shall not go by this train," repeated Syme.
"And why the infernal blazes," roared the other, "should I want togo by the train?"
"We know all," said the Professor sternly.
"You are going to Paristo throw a bomb!"
"Going to Jericho to throw a Jabberwock!"
cried the other, tearinghis hair, which came off easily.
"Have you all got softening of the brain, that you don't realisewhat I am?
Did you really think I wanted to catch that train?
Twenty Paris trains might go by for me.
Damn Paris trains!"
"Then what did you care about?"
began the Professor.
"What did I care about?
I didn't care about catching the train; Icared about whether the train caught me, and now, by God!
it hascaught me."
"I regret to inform you," said Syme with restraint, "that yourremarks convey no impression to my mind.
Perhaps if you were toremove the remains of your original forehead and some portion ofwhat was once your chin, your meaning would become clearer.
Mentallucidity fulfils itself in many ways.
What do you mean by sayingthat the train has caught you?
It may be my literary fancy, butsomehow I feel that it ought to mean something."
"It means everything," said the other, "and the end of everything.
Sunday has us now in the hollow of his hand."
"Us!"
repeated the Professor, as if stupefied.
"What do you mean by'us'?"
"The police, of course!"
said the Marquis, and tore off his scalpand half his face.
The head which emerged was the blonde, well brushed, smooth-hairedhead which is common in the English constabulary, but the face wasterribly pale.
"I am Inspector Ratcliffe," he said, with a sort of haste thatverged on harshness.
"My name is pretty well known to the police,and I can see well enough that you belong to them.
But if there isany doubt about my position, I have a card" and he began to pull ablue card from his pocket.
The Professor gave a tired gesture.
"Oh, don't show it us," he said wearily; "we've got enough of themto equip a paper-chase."
The little man named Bull, had, like many men who seem to be of amere vivacious vulgarity, sudden movements of good taste.
Here hecertainly saved the situation.
In the midst of this staggeringtransformation scene he stepped forward with all the gravity andresponsibility of a second, and addressed the two seconds of theMarquis.
"Gentlemen," he said, "we all owe you a serious apology; but Iassure you that you have not been made the victims of such a lowjoke as you imagine, or indeed of anything undignified in a man ofhonour.
You have not wasted your time; you have helped to save theworld.
We are not buffoons, but very desperate men at war with avast conspiracy.
A secret society of anarchists is hunting us likehares; not such unfortunate madmen as may here or there throw abomb through starvation or German philosophy, but a rich andpowerful and fanatical church, a church of eastern pessimism, whichholds it holy to destroy mankind like vermin.
How hard they hunt usyou can gather from the fact that we are driven to such disguisesas those for which I apologise, and to such pranks as this one bywhich you suffer. "
The younger second of the Marquis, a short man with a blackmoustache, bowed politely, and said--"Of course, I accept the apology; but you will in your turn forgiveme if I decline to follow you further into your difficulties, andpermit myself to say good morning!
The sight of an acquaintance anddistinguished fellow-townsman coming to pieces in the open air isunusual, and, upon the whole, sufficient for one day.
ColonelDucroix, I would in no way influence your actions, but if you feelwith me that our present society is a little abnormal, I am nowgoing to walk back to the town."
Colonel Ducroix moved mechanically, but then tugged abruptly at hiswhite moustache and broke out--"No, by George!
I won't.
If these gentlemen are really in a messwith a lot of low wreckers like that, I'll see them through it.
Ihave fought for France, and it is hard if I can't fight forcivilization."
Dr. Bull took off his hat and waved it, cheering as at a publicmeeting.
"Don't make too much noise," said Inspector Ratcliffe, "Sunday mayhear you."
"Sunday!"
cried Bull, and dropped his hat.
"Yes," retorted Ratcliffe, "he may be with them."
"With whom?"
asked Syme.
"With the people out of that train," said the other.
"What you say seems utterly wild," began Syme.
"Why, as a matter offact--But, my God," he cried out suddenly, like a man who sees anexplosion a long way off, "by God!
if this is true the whole ballylot of us on the Anarchist Council were against anarchy!
Every bornman was a detective except the President and his personalsecretary.
What can it mean?"
"Mean!"
said the new policeman with incredible violence.
"It meansthat we are struck dead!
Don't you know Sunday?
Don't you know thathis jokes are always so big and simple that one has never thoughtof them?
Can you think of anything more like Sunday than this, thathe should put all his powerful enemies on the Supreme Council, andthen take care that it was not supreme?
I tell you he has boughtevery trust, he has captured every cable, he has control of everyrailway line--especially of that railway line!"
and he pointed ashaking finger towards the small wayside station.
"The wholemovement was controlled by him; half the world was ready to risefor him.
But there were just five people, perhaps, who would haveresisted him .
.
.
and the old devil put them on the SupremeCouncil, to waste their time in watching each other.
Idiots thatwe are, he planned the whole of our idiocies!
Sunday knew that theProfessor would chase Syme through London, and that Syme wouldfight me in France.
And he was combining great masses of capital,and seizing great lines of telegraphy, while we five idiots wererunning after each other like a lot of confounded babies playingblind man's buff."
"Well?"
asked Syme with a sort of steadiness.
"Well," replied the other with sudden serenity, "he has found usplaying blind man's buff today in a field of great rustic beautyand extreme solitude.
He has probably captured the world; it onlyremains to him to capture this field and all the fools in it.
Andsince you really want to know what was my objection to the arrivalof that train, I will tell you.
My objection was that Sunday or hisSecretary has just this moment got out of it."
Syme uttered an involuntary cry, and they all turned their eyestowards the far-off station.
It was quite true that a considerablebulk of people seemed to be moving in their direction.
But theywere too distant to be distinguished in any way.
"It was a habit of the late Marquis de St. Eustache," said the newpoliceman, producing a leather case, "always to carry a pair ofopera glasses.
Either the President or the Secretary is comingafter us with that mob.
They have caught us in a nice quiet placewhere we are under no temptations to break our oaths by callingthe police.
Dr. Bull, I have a suspicion that you will see betterthrough these than through your own highly decorative spectacles."
He handed the field-glasses to the Doctor, who immediately tookoff his spectacles and put the apparatus to his eyes.
"It cannot be as bad as you say," said the Professor, somewhatshaken.
"There are a good number of them certainly, but they mayeasily be ordinary tourists."
"Do ordinary tourists," asked Bull, with the fieldglasses to hiseyes, "wear black masks half-way down the face?"
Syme almost tore the glasses out of his hand, and looked throughthem.
Most men in the advancing mob really looked ordinary enough;but it was quite true that two or three of the leaders in frontwore black half-masks almost down to their mouths.
This disguiseis very complete, especially at such a distance, and Syme foundit impossible to conclude anything from the clean-shaven jaws andchins of the men talking in the front.
But presently as theytalked they all smiled and one of them smiled on one side.
CHAPTER XITHE CRIMINALS CHASE THE POLICESYME put the field-glasses from his eyes with an almost ghastlyrelief.
"The President is not with them, anyhow," he said, and wiped hisforehead.
"But surely they are right away on the horizon," said thebewildered Colonel, blinking and but half recovered from Bull'shasty though polite explanation.
"Could you possibly know yourPresident among all those people?"
"Could I know a white elephant among all those people!"
answeredSyme somewhat irritably.
"As you very truly say, they are on thehorizon; but if he were walking with them .
.
.
by God!
I believethis ground would shake."
After an instant's pause the new man called Ratcliffe said withgloomy decision--"Of course the President isn't with them.
I wish to Gemini he were.
Much more likely the President is riding in triumph through Paris,or sitting on the ruins of St. Paul's Cathedral."
"This is absurd!"
said Syme.
"Something may have happened in ourabsence; but he cannot have carried the world with a rush likethat.
It is quite true," he added, frowning dubiously at thedistant fields that lay towards the little station, "it iscertainly true that there seems to be a crowd coming this way;but they are not all the army that you make out."
"Oh, they," said the new detective contemptuously; "no they arenot a very valuable force.
But let me tell you frankly that theyare precisely calculated to our value--we are not much, my boy,in Sunday's universe.
He has got hold of all the cables andtelegraphs himself.
But to kill the Supreme Council he regards asa trivial matter, like a post card; it may be left to his privatesecretary," and he spat on the grass.
Then he turned to the others and said somewhat austerely--"There is a great deal to be said for death; but if anyone hasany preference for the other alternative, I strongly advise himto walk after me."
With these words, he turned his broad back and strode with silentenergy towards the wood.
The others gave one glance over theirshoulders, and saw that the dark cloud of men had detached itselffrom the station and was moving with a mysterious disciplineacross the plain.
They saw already, even with the naked eye, blackblots on the foremost faces, which marked the masks they wore.
They turned and followed their leader, who had already struck thewood, and disappeared among the twinkling trees.
The sun on the grass was dry and hot.
So in plunging into the woodthey had a cool shock of shadow, as of divers who plunge into adim pool.
The inside of the wood was full of shattered sunlightand shaken shadows.
They made a sort of shuddering veil, almostrecalling the dizziness of a cinematograph.
Even the solid figureswalking with him Syme could hardly see for the patterns of sun andshade that danced upon them.
Now a man's head was lit as with alight of Rembrandt, leaving all else obliterated; now again he hadstrong and staring white hands with the face of a negro.
Theex-Marquis had pulled the old straw hat over his eyes, and theblack shade of the brim cut his face so squarely in two that itseemed to be wearing one of the black half-masks of their pursuers.
The fancy tinted Syme's overwhelming sense of wonder.
Was hewearing a mask?
Was anyone wearing a mask?
Was anyone anything?
This wood of witchery, in which men's faces turned black and whiteby turns, in which their figures first swelled into sunlight andthen faded into formless night, this mere chaos of chiaroscuro(after the clear daylight outside), seemed to Syme a perfect symbolof the world in which he had been moving for three days, this worldwhere men took off their beards and their spectacles and theirnoses, and turned into other people.
That tragic self-confidencewhich he had felt when he believed that the Marquis was a devilhad strangely disappeared now that he knew that the Marquis wasa friend.
He felt almost inclined to ask after all thesebewilderments what was a friend and what an enemy.
Was thereanything that was apart from what it seemed?
The Marquis had takenoff his nose and turned out to be a detective.
Might he not justas well take off his head and turn out to be a hobgoblin?
Was noteverything, after all, like this bewildering woodland, this danceof dark and light?
Everything only a glimpse, the glimpse alwaysunforeseen, and always forgotten.
For Gabriel Syme had found inthe heart of that sun-splashed wood what many modern painters hadfound there.
He had found the thing which the modern people callImpressionism, which is another name for that final scepticismwhich can find no floor to the universe.
As a man in an evil dream strains himself to scream and wake, Symestrove with a sudden effort to fling off this last and worst ofhis fancies.
With two impatient strides he overtook the man in theMarquis's straw hat, the man whom he had come to address asRatcliffe.
In a voice exaggeratively loud and cheerful, he brokethe bottomless silence and made conversation.
"May I ask," he said, "where on earth we are all going to? "
So genuine had been the doubts of his soul, that he was quite gladto hear his companion speak in an easy, human voice.
"We must get down through the town of Lancy to the sea," he said.
"I think that part of the country is least likely to be withthem."
"What can you mean by all this?"
cried Syme.
"They can't berunning the real world in that way.
Surely not many working menare anarchists, and surely if they were, mere mobs could not beatmodern armies and police."
"Mere mobs!"
repeated his new friend with a snort of scorn.
"Soyou talk about mobs and the working classes as if they were thequestion.
You've got that eternal idiotic idea that if anarchycame it would come from the poor.
Why should it?
The poor havebeen rebels, but they have never been anarchists; they have moreinterest than anyone else in there being some decent government.
The poor man really has a stake in the country.
The rich manhasn't; he can go away to New Guinea in a yacht.
The poor havesometimes objected to being governed badly; the rich have alwaysobjected to being governed at all.
Aristocrats were alwaysanarchists, as you can see from the barons' wars."
"As a lecture on English history for the little ones," said Syme,"this is all very nice; but I have not yet grasped its application."
"Its application is," said his informant, "that most of old Sunday'sright-hand men are South African and American millionaires.
That iswhy he has got hold of all the communications; and that is why thelast four champions of the anti-anarchist police force are runningthrough a wood like rabbits."
"Millionaires I can understand," said Syme thoughtfully, "they arenearly all mad.
But getting hold of a few wicked old gentlemen withhobbies is one thing; getting hold of great Christian nations isanother.
I would bet the nose off my face (forgive the allusion)that Sunday would stand perfectly helpless before the task ofconverting any ordinary healthy person anywhere."
"Well," said the other, "it rather depends what sort of person youmean."
"Well, for instance," said Syme, "he could never convert thatperson," and he pointed straight in front of him.
They had come to an open space of sunlight, which seemed to expressto Syme the final return of his own good sense; and in the middleof this forest clearing was a figure that might well stand for thatcommon sense in an almost awful actuality.
Burnt by the sun andstained with perspiration, and grave with the bottomless gravity ofsmall necessary toils, a heavy French peasant was cutting wood witha hatchet.
His cart stood a few yards off, already half full oftimber; and the horse that cropped the grass was, like his master,valorous but not desperate; like his master, he was evenprosperous, but yet was almost sad.
The man was a Norman, tallerthan the average of the French and very angular; and his swarthyfigure stood dark against a square of sunlight, almost like someallegoric figure of labour frescoed on a ground of gold.
"Mr. Syme is saying," called out Ratcliffe to the French Colonel,"that this man, at least, will never be an anarchist."
"Mr. Syme is right enough there," answered Colonel Ducroix,laughing, "if only for the reason that he has plenty of propertyto defend.
But I forgot that in your country you are not used topeasants being wealthy."
"He looks poor," said Dr. Bull doubtfully.
"Quite so," said the Colonel; "that is why he is rich."
"I have an idea," called out Dr. Bull suddenly; "how much would hetake to give us a lift in his cart?
Those dogs are all on foot, andwe could soon leave them behind."
"Oh, give him anything!"
said Syme eagerly.
"I have piles of moneyon me."
"That will never do," said the Colonel; "he will never have anyrespect for you unless you drive a bargain."
"Oh, if he haggles!"
began Bull impatiently.
"Erie haggles because he is a free man," said the other.
"You donot understand; he would not see the meaning of generosity.
He isnot being tipped."
And even while they seemed to hear the heavy feet of their strangepursuers behind them, they had to stand and stamp while the FrenchColonel talked to the French wood-cutter with all the leisurelybadinage and bickering of market-day.
At the end of the fourminutes, however, they saw that the Colonel was right, for thewood-cutter entered into their plans, not with the vague servilityof a tout too-well paid, but with the seriousness of a solicitorwho had been paid the proper fee.
He told them that the best thingthey could do was to make their way down to the little inn on thehills above Lancy, where the innkeeper, an old soldier who hadbecome devot in his latter years, would be certain to sympathisewith them, and even to take risks in their support.
The wholecompany, therefore, piled themselves on top of the stacks of wood,and went rocking in the rude cart down the other and steeper sideof the woodland.
Heavy and ramshackle as was the vehicle, it wasdriven quickly enough, and they soon had the exhilaratingimpression of distancing altogether those, whoever they were, whowere hunting them.
For, after all, the riddle as to where theanarchists had got all these followers was still unsolved.
Oneman's presence had sufficed for them; they had fled at the firstsight of the deformed smile of the Secretary.
Syme every now andthen looked back over his shoulder at the army on their track.
As the wood grew first thinner and then smaller with distance, hecould see the sunlit slopes beyond it and above it; and acrossthese was still moving the square black mob like one monstrousbeetle.
In the very strong sunlight and with his own very strongeyes, which were almost telescopic, Syme could see this mass ofmen quite plainly.
He could see them as separate human figures;but he was increasingly surprised by the way in which they movedas one man.
They seemed to be dressed in dark clothes and plainhats, like any common crowd out of the streets; but they did notspread and sprawl and trail by various lines to the attack, aswould be natural in an ordinary mob.
They moved with a sort ofdreadful and wicked woodenness, like a staring army of automatons.
Syme pointed this out to Ratcliffe.
"Yes," replied the policeman, "that's discipline.
That's Sunday.
Heis perhaps five hundred miles off, but the fear of him is on all ofthem, like the finger of God.
Yes, they are walking regularly; andyou bet your boots that they are talking regularly, yes, andthinking regularly.
But the one important thing for us is that theyare disappearing regularly."
Syme nodded.
It was true that the black patch of the pursuing menwas growing smaller and smaller as the peasant belaboured hishorse.
The level of the sunlit landscape, though flat as a whole, fellaway on the farther side of the wood in billows of heavy slopetowards the sea, in a way not unlike the lower slopes of theSussex downs.
The only difference was that in Sussex the roadwould have been broken and angular like a little brook, buthere the white French road fell sheer in front of them like awaterfall.
Down this direct descent the cart clattered at aconsiderable angle, and in a few minutes, the road growing yetsteeper, they saw below them the little harbour of Lancy and agreat blue arc of the sea.
The travelling cloud of their enemieshad wholly disappeared from the horizon.
The horse and cart took a sharp turn round a clump of elms, andthe horse's nose nearly struck the face of an old gentleman whowas sitting on the benches outside the little cafe of "Le Soleild'Or."
The peasant grunted an apology, and got down from hisseat.
The others also descended one by one, and spoke to the oldgentleman with fragmentary phrases of courtesy, for it was quiteevident from his expansive manner that he was the owner of thelittle tavern.
He was a white-haired, apple-faced old boy, with sleepy eyes anda grey moustache; stout, sedentary, and very innocent, of a typethat may often be found in France, but is still commoner inCatholic Germany.
Everything about him, his pipe, his pot of beer,his flowers, and his beehive, suggested an ancestral peace; onlywhen his visitors looked up as they entered the inn-parlour, theysaw the sword upon the wall.
The Colonel, who greeted the innkeeper as an old friend, passedrapidly into the inn-parlour, and sat down ordering some ritualrefreshment.
The military decision of his action interested Syme,who sat next to him, and he took the opportunity when the oldinnkeeper had gone out of satisfying his curiosity.
"May I ask you, Colonel," he said in a low voice, "why we havecome here?"
Colonel Ducroix smiled behind his bristly white moustache.
"For two reasons, sir," he said; "and I will give first, not themost important, but the most utilitarian.
We came here becausethis is the only place within twenty miles in which we can gethorses."
"Horses!"
repeated Syme, looking up quickly.
"Yes," replied the other; "if you people are really to distanceyour enemies it is horses or nothing for you, unless of courseyou have bicycles and motor-cars in your pocket."
"And where do you advise us to make for?"
asked Syme doubtfully.
"Beyond question," replied the Colonel, "you had better make allhaste to the police station beyond the town.
My friend, whom Iseconded under somewhat deceptive circumstances, seems to me toexaggerate very much the possibilities of a general rising; buteven he would hardly maintain, I suppose, that you were not safewith the gendarmes."
Syme nodded gravely; then he said abruptly--"And your other reason for coming here?"
"My other reason for coming here," said Ducroix soberly, "is thatit is just as well to see a good man or two when one is possiblynear to death."
Syme looked up at the wall, and saw a crudely-painted and patheticreligious picture.
Then he said--"You are right," and then almost immediately afterwards, "Hasanyone seen about the horses?"
"Yes," answered Ducroix, "you may be quite certain that I gaveorders the moment I came in.
Those enemies of yours gave noimpression of hurry, but they were really moving wonderfully fast,like a well-trained army.
I had no idea that the anarchists had somuch discipline.
You have not a moment to waste."
Almost as he spoke, the old innkeeper with the blue eyes and whitehair came ambling into the room, and announced that six horseswere saddled outside.
By Ducroix's advice the five others equipped themselves with someportable form of food and wine, and keeping their duelling swordsas the only weapons available, they clattered away down the steep,white road.
The two servants, who had carried the Marquis'sluggage when he was a marquis, were left behind to drink at thecafe by common consent, and not at all against their owninclination.
By this time the afternoon sun was slanting westward, and by itsrays Syme could see the sturdy figure of the old innkeeper growingsmaller and smaller, but still standing and looking after themquite silently, the sunshine in his silver hair.
Syme had a fixed,superstitious fancy, left in his mind by the chance phrase of theColonel, that this was indeed, perhaps, the last honest strangerwhom he should ever see upon the earth.
He was still looking at this dwindling figure, which stood as amere grey blot touched with a white flame against the great greenwall of the steep down behind him.
And as he stared over the topof the down behind the innkeeper, there appeared an army ofblack-clad and marching men.
They seemed to hang above the goodman and his house like a black cloud of locusts.
The horses hadbeen saddled none too soon.
CHAPTER XIITHE EARTH IN ANARCHYURGING the horses to a gallop, without respect to the ratherrugged descent of the road, the horsemen soon regained theiradvantage over the men on the march, and at last the bulk of thefirst buildings of Lancy cut off the sight of their pursuers.
Nevertheless, the ride had been a long one, and by the time theyreached the real town the west was warming with the colour andquality of sunset.
The Colonel suggested that, before makingfinally for the police station, they should make the effort, inpassing, to attach to themselves one more individual who might beuseful.
"Four out of the five rich men in this town," he said, "are commonswindlers.
I suppose the proportion is pretty equal all over theworld.
The fifth is a friend of mine, and a very fine fellow; andwhat is even more important from our point of view, he owns amotor-car."
"I am afraid," said the Professor in his mirthful way, lookingback along the white road on which the black, crawling patch mightappear at any moment, "I am afraid we have hardly time forafternoon calls."
"Doctor Renard's house is only three minutes off," said theColonel.
"Our danger," said Dr. Bull, "is not two minutes off."
"Yes," said Syme, "if we ride on fast we must leave them behind,for they are on foot."
"He has a motor-car," said the Colonel.
"But we may not get it," said Bull.
"Yes, he is quite on your side."
"But he might be out."
"Hold your tongue," said Syme suddenly.
"What is that noise?"
For a second they all sat as still as equestrian statues, andfor a second--for two or three or four seconds--heaven and earthseemed equally still.
Then all their ears, in an agony ofattention, heard along the road that indescribable thrill andthrob that means only one thing--horses!
The Colonel's face had an instantaneous change, as if lightninghad struck it, and yet left it scatheless.
"They have done us," he said, with brief military irony.
"Prepareto receive cavalry!"
"Where can they have got the horses?"
asked Syme, as hemechanically urged his steed to a canter.
The Colonel was silent for a little, then he said in a strainedvoice--"I was speaking with strict accuracy when I said that the 'Soleild'Or' was the only place where one can get horses within twentymiles."
"No!"
said Syme violently, "I don't believe he'd do it.
Not withall that white hair."
"He may have been forced," said the Colonel gently.
"They must beat least a hundred strong, for which reason we are all going tosee my friend Renard, who has a motor-car."
With these words he swung his horse suddenly round a streetcorner, and went down the street with such thundering speed, thatthe others, though already well at the gallop, had difficulty infollowing the flying tail of his horse.
Dr. Renard inhabited a high and comfortable house at the top of asteep street, so that when the riders alighted at his door theycould once more see the solid green ridge of the hill, with thewhite road across it, standing up above all the roofs of the town.
They breathed again to see that the road as yet was clear, and theyrang the bell.
Dr. Renard was a beaming, brown-bearded man, a good example of thatsilent but very busy professional class which France has preservedeven more perfectly than England.
When the matter was explained tohim he pooh-poohed the panic of the ex-Marquis altogether; he said,with the solid French scepticism, that there was no conceivableprobability of a general anarchist rising.
"Anarchy," he said,shrugging his shoulders, "it is childishness!"
"Et ca," cried out the Colonel suddenly, pointing over the other'sshoulder, "and that is childishness, isn't it?"
They all looked round, and saw a curve of black cavalry comesweeping over the top of the hill with all the energy of Attila.
Swiftly as they rode, however, the whole rank still kept welltogether, and they could see the black vizards of the first lineas level as a line of uniforms.
But although the main blacksquare was the same, though travelling faster, there was now onesensational difference which they could see clearly upon the slopeof the hill, as if upon a slanted map.
The bulk of the riders werein one block; but one rider flew far ahead of the column, and withfrantic movements of hand and heel urged his horse faster andfaster, so that one might have fancied that he was not the pursuerbut the pursued.
But even at that great distance they could seesomething so fanatical, so unquestionable in his figure, that theyknew it was the Secretary himself.
"I am sorry to cut short acultured discussion," said the Colonel, "but can you lend me yourmotor-car now, in two minutes?"
"I have a suspicion that you are all mad," said Dr. Renard, smilingsociably; "but God forbid that madness should in any way interruptfriendship.
Let us go round to the garage."
Dr. Renard was a mild man with monstrous wealth; his rooms werelike the Musee de Cluny, and he had three motor-cars.
These,however, he seemed to use very sparingly, having the simple tastesof the French middle class, and when his impatient friends came toexamine them, it took them some time to assure themselves that oneof them even could be made to work.
This with some difficulty theybrought round into the street before the Doctor's house.
When theycame out of the dim garage they were startled to find thattwilight had already fallen with the abruptness of night in thetropics.
Either they had been longer in the place than theyimagined, or some unusual canopy of cloud had gathered over thetown.
They looked down the steep streets, and seemed to see aslight mist coming up from the sea.
"It is now or never," said Dr. Bull.
"I hear horses."
"No," corrected the Professor, "a horse."
And as they listened, it was evident that the noise, rapidlycoming nearer on the rattling stones, was not the noise of thewhole cavalcade but that of the one horseman, who had left itfar behind--the insane Secretary.
Syme's family, like most of those who end in the simple life, hadonce owned a motor, and he knew all about them.
He had leapt atonce into the chauffeur's seat, and with flushed face was wrenchingand tugging at the disused machinery.
He bent his strength upon onehandle, and then said quite quietly--"I am afraid it's no go."
As he spoke, there swept round the corner a man rigid on hisrushing horse, with the rush and rigidity of an arrow.
He had asmile that thrust out his chin as if it were dislocated.
He sweptalongside of the stationary car, into which its company hadcrowded, and laid his hand on the front.
It was the Secretary,and his mouth went quite straight in the solemnity of triumph.
Syme was leaning hard upon the steering wheel, and there was nosound but the rumble of the other pursuers riding into the town.
Then there came quite suddenly a scream of scraping iron, and thecar leapt forward.
It plucked the Secretary clean out of hissaddle, as a knife is whipped out of its sheath, trailed himkicking terribly for twenty yards, and left him flung flat uponthe road far in front of his frightened horse.
As the car tookthe corner of the street with a splendid curve, they could justsee the other anarchists filling the street and raising theirfallen leader.
"I can't understand why it has grown so dark," said the Professorat last in a low voice.
"Going to be a storm, I think," said Dr. Bull.
"I say, it's a pitywe haven't got a light on this car, if only to see by."
"We have," said the Colonel, and from the floor of the car hefished up a heavy, old-fashioned, carved iron lantern with a lightinside it.
It was obviously an antique, and it would seem as ifits original use had been in some way semi-religious, for therewas a rude moulding of a cross upon one of its sides.
"Where on earth did you get that?"
asked the Professor.
"I got it where I got the car," answered the Colonel, chuckling,"from my best friend.
While our friend here was fighting with thesteering wheel, I ran up the front steps of the house and spoke toRenard, who was standing in his own porch, you will remember.
'Isuppose,' I said, 'there's no time to get a lamp.'
He looked up,blinking amiably at the beautiful arched ceiling of his own fronthall.
From this was suspended, by chains of exquisite ironwork,this lantern, one of the hundred treasures of his treasure house.
By sheer force he tore the lamp out of his own ceiling, shatteringthe painted panels, and bringing down two blue vases with hisviolence.
Then he handed me the iron lantern, and I put it in thecar.
Was I not right when I said that Dr. Renard was worthknowing?"
"You were," said Syme seriously, and hung the heavy lantern overthe front.
There was a certain allegory of their whole positionin the contrast between the modern automobile and its strangeecclesiastical lamp.
Hitherto they had passed through the quietestpart of the town, meeting at most one or two pedestrians, who couldgive them no hint of the peace or the hostility of the place.
Now,however, the windows in the houses began one by one to be lit up,giving a greater sense of habitation and humanity.
Dr. Bull turnedto the new detective who had led their flight, and permittedhimself one of his natural and friendly smiles.
"These lights make one feel more cheerful."
Inspector Ratcliffe drew his brows together.
"There is only one set of lights that make me more cheerful," hesaid, "and they are those lights of the police station which I cansee beyond the town.
Please God we may be there in ten minutes."
Then all Bull's boiling good sense and optimism broke suddenly outof him.
"Oh, this is all raving nonsense!"
he cried.
"If you really thinkthat ordinary people in ordinary houses are anarchists, you must bemadder than an anarchist yourself.
If we turned and fought thesefellows, the whole town would fight for us."
"No," said the other with an immovable simplicity, "the whole townwould fight for them.
We shall see.'
While they were speaking the Professor had leant forward withsudden excitement.
"What is that noise?"
he said.
"Oh, the horses behind us, I suppose," said the Colonel.
"I thoughtwe had got clear of them."
"The horses behind us!
No," said the Professor, "it is not horses,and it is not behind us."
Almost as he spoke, across the end of the street before them twoshining and rattling shapes shot past.
They were gone almost in aflash, but everyone could see that they were motor-cars, and theProfessor stood up with a pale face and swore that they were theother two motor-cars from Dr. Renard's garage.
"I tell you they were his," he repeated, with wild eyes, "and theywere full of men in masks!"
"Absurd!"
said the Colonel angrily.
"Dr. Renard would never givethem his cars."
"He may have been forced," said Ratcliffe quietly.
"The whole townis on their side."
"You still believe that," asked the Colonel incredulously.
"You will all believe it soon," said the other with a hopelesscalm.
There was a puzzled pause for some little time, and then theColonel began again abruptly--"No, I can't believe it.
The thing is nonsense.
The plain people ofa peaceable French town--"He was cut short by a bang and a blaze of light, which seemed closeto his eyes.
As the car sped on it left a floating patch of whitesmoke behind it, and Syme had heard a shot shriek past his ear.
"My God!"
said the Colonel, "someone has shot at us."
"It need not interrupt conversation," said the gloomy Ratcliffe.
"Pray resume your remarks, Colonel.
You were talking, I think,about the plain people of a peaceable French town."
The staring Colonel was long past minding satire.
He rolled hiseyes all round the street.
"It is extraordinary," he said, "most extraordinary."
"A fastidious person," said Syme, "might even call it unpleasant.
However, I suppose those lights out in the field beyond this streetare the Gendarmerie.
We shall soon get there."
"No," said Inspector Ratcliffe, "we shall never get there."
He had been standing up and looking keenly ahead of him.
Now he satdown and smoothed his sleek hair with a weary gesture.
"What do you mean?"
asked Bull sharply.
"I mean that we shall never get there," said the pessimistplacidly.
"They have two rows of armed men across the road already;I can see them from here.
The town is in arms, as I said it was.
I can only wallow in the exquisite comfort of my own exactitude."
And Ratcliffe sat down comfortably in the car and lit a cigarette,but the others rose excitedly and stared down the road.
Syme hadslowed down the car as their plans became doubtful, and he broughtit finally to a standstill just at the corner of a side streetthat ran down very steeply to the sea.
The town was mostly in shadow, but the sun had not sunk; whereverits level light could break through, it painted everything aburning gold.
Up this side street the last sunset light shone assharp and narrow as the shaft of artificial light at the theatre.
It struck the car of the five friends, and lit it like a burningchariot.
But the rest of the street, especially the two ends ofit, was in the deepest twilight, and for some seconds they couldsee nothing.
Then Syme, whose eyes were the keenest, broke into alittle bitter whistle, and said"It is quite true.
There is a crowd or an army or some such thingacross the end of that street."
"Well, if there is," said Bull impatiently, "it must be somethingelse--a sham fight or the mayor's birthday or something.
I cannotand will not believe that plain, jolly people in a place like thiswalk about with dynamite in their pockets.
Get on a bit, Syme, andlet us look at them."
The car crawled about a hundred yards farther, and then they wereall startled by Dr. Bull breaking into a high crow of laughter.
"Why, you silly mugs!"
he cried, "what did I tell you.
Thatcrowd's as law-abiding as a cow, and if it weren't, it's on ourside."
"How do you know?"
asked the professor, staring.
"You blind bat," cried Bull, "don't you see who is leading them?"
They peered again, and then the Colonel, with a catch in hisvoice, cried out--"Why, it's Renard!"
There was, indeed, a rank of dim figures running across the road,and they could not be clearly seen; but far enough in front tocatch the accident of the evening light was stalking up and downthe unmistakable Dr. Renard, in a white hat, stroking his longbrown beard, and holding a revolver in his left hand.
"What a fool I've been!"
exclaimed the Colonel.
"Of course, thedear old boy has turned out to help us."
Dr. Bull was bubbling over with laughter, swinging the sword inhis hand as carelessly as a cane.
He jumped out of the car andran across the intervening space, calling out--"Dr. Renard!
Dr.
Renard!"
An instant after Syme thought his own eyes had gone mad in hishead.
For the philanthropic Dr. Renard had deliberately raised hisrevolver and fired twice at Bull, so that the shots rang down theroad.
Almost at the same second as the puff of white cloud went up fromthis atrocious explosion a long puff of white cloud went up alsofrom the cigarette of the cynical Ratcliffe.
Like all the rest heturned a little pale, but he smiled.
Dr. Bull, at whom the bulletshad been fired, just missing his scalp, stood quite still in themiddle of the road without a sign of fear, and then turned veryslowly and crawled back to the car, and climbed in with two holesthrough his hat.
"Well," said the cigarette smoker slowly, "what do you think now?"
"I think," said Dr. Bull with precision, "that I am lying in bedat No.
217 Peabody Buildings, and that I shall soon wake up with ajump; or, if that's not it, I think that I am sitting in a smallcushioned cell in Hanwell, and that the doctor can't make much ofmy case.
But if you want to know what I don't think, I'll tell you.
I don't think what you think.
I don't think, and I never shallthink, that the mass of ordinary men are a pack of dirty modernthinkers.
No, sir, I'm a democrat, and I still don't believe thatSunday could convert one average navvy or counter-jumper.
No, I maybe mad, but humanity isn't."
Syme turned his bright blue eyes on Bull with an earnestness whichhe did not commonly make clear.
"You are a very fine fellow," he said.
"You can believe in a sanitywhich is not merely your sanity.
And you're right enough abouthumanity, about peasants and people like that jolly old innkeeper.
But you're not right about Renard.
I suspected him from the first.
He's rationalistic, and, what's worse, he's rich.
When duty andreligion are really destroyed, it will be by the rich."
"They are really destroyed now," said the man with a cigarette, androse with his hands in his pockets.
"The devils are coming on!"
The men in the motor-car looked anxiously in the direction of hisdreamy gaze, and they saw that the whole regiment at the end of theroad was advancing upon them, Dr. Renard marching furiously infront, his beard flying in the breeze.
The Colonel sprang out of the car with an intolerant exclamation.
"Gentlemen," he cried, "the thing is incredible.
It must be apractical joke.
If you knew Renard as I do--it's like calling QueenVictoria a dynamiter.
If you had got the man's character into yourhead--""Dr. Bull," said Syme sardonically, "has at least got it into hishat."
"I tell you it can't be!"
cried the Colonel, stamping.
"Renard shall explain it.
He shall explain it to me," and he strodeforward.
"Don't be in such a hurry," drawled the smoker.
"He will very soonexplain it to all of us."
But the impatient Colonel was already out of earshot, advancingtowards the advancing enemy.
The excited Dr. Renard lifted hispistol again, but perceiving his opponent, hesitated, and theColonel came face to face with him with frantic gestures ofremonstrance.
"It is no good," said Syme.
"He will never get anything out of thatold heathen.
I vote we drive bang through the thick of them, bangas the bullets went through Bull's hat.
We may all be killed, butwe must kill a tidy number of them."
"I won't 'ave it," said Dr. Bull, growing more vulgar in thesincerity of his virtue.
"The poor chaps may be making a mistake.
Give the Colonel a chance."
"Shall we go back, then?"
asked the Professor.
"No," said Ratcliffe in a cold voice, "the street behind us is heldtoo.
In fact, I seem to see there another friend of yours, Syme."
Syme spun round smartly, and stared backwards at the track whichthey had travelled.
He saw an irregular body of horsemen gatheringand galloping towards them in the gloom.
He saw above the foremostsaddle the silver gleam of a sword, and then as it grew nearer thesilver gleam of an old man's hair.
The next moment, with shatteringviolence, he had swung the motor round and sent it dashing down thesteep side street to the sea, like a man that desired only to die.
"What the devil is up?"
cried the Professor, seizing his arm.
"The morning star has fallen!"
said Syme, as his own car went downthe darkness like a falling star.
The others did not understand his words, but when they looked backat the street above they saw the hostile cavalry coming round thecorner and down the slopes after them; and foremost of all rode thegood innkeeper, flushed with the fiery innocence of the eveninglight.
"The world is insane!"
said the Professor, and buried his face inhis hands.
"No," said Dr. Bull in adamantine humility, "it is I."
"What are we going to do?"
asked the Professor.
"At this moment," said Syme, with a scientific detachment, "I thinkwe are going to smash into a lamppost."
The next instant the automobile had come with a catastrophic jaragainst an iron object.
The instant after that four men had crawledout from under a chaos of metal, and a tall lean lamp-post that hadstood up straight on the edge of the marine parade stood out, bentand twisted, like the branch of a broken tree.
"Well, we smashed something," said the Professor, with a faintsmile.
"That's some comfort."
"You're becoming an anarchist," said Syme, dusting his clotheswith his instinct of daintiness.
"Everyone is," said Ratcliffe.
As they spoke, the white-haired horseman and his followers camethundering from above, and almost at the same moment a dark stringof men ran shouting along the sea-front.
Syme snatched a sword,and took it in his teeth; he stuck two others under his arm-pits,took a fourth in his left hand and the lantern in his right, andleapt off the high parade on to the beach below.
The others leapt after him, with a common acceptance of suchdecisive action, leaving the debris and the gathering mob abovethem.
"We have one more chance," said Syme, taking the steel out of hismouth.
"Whatever all this pandemonium means, I suppose the policestation will help us.
We can't get there, for they hold the way.
But there's a pier or breakwater runs out into the sea just here,which we could defend longer than anything else, like Horatius andhis bridge.
We must defend it till the Gendarmerie turn out.
Keepafter me."
They followed him as he went crunching down the beach, and in asecond or two their boots broke not on the sea gravel, but onbroad, flat stones.
They marched down a long, low jetty, runningout in one arm into the dim, boiling sea, and when they came tothe end of it they felt that they had come to the end of theirstory.
They turned and faced the town.
That town was transfigured with uproar.
All along the high paradefrom which they had just descended was a dark and roaring streamof humanity, with tossing arms and fiery faces, groping andglaring towards them.
The long dark line was dotted with torchesand lanterns; but even where no flame lit up a furious face, theycould see in the farthest figure, in the most shadowy gesture, anorganised hate.
It was clear that they were the accursed of allmen, and they knew not why.
Two or three men, looking little and black like monkeys, leaptover the edge as they had done and dropped on to the beach.
Thesecame ploughing down the deep sand, shouting horribly, and stroveto wade into the sea at random.
The example was followed, and thewhole black mass of men began to run and drip over the edge likeblack treacle.
Foremost among the men on the beach Syme saw the peasant who haddriven their cart.
He splashed into the surf on a hugecart-horse, and shook his axe at them.
"The peasant!"
cried Syme.
"They have not risen since the MiddleAges."
"Even if the police do come now," said the Professor mournfully,"they can do nothing with this mob."
"Nonsence!"
said Bull desperately; "there must be some peopleleft in the town who are human."
"No," said the hopeless Inspector, "the human being will soon beextinct.
We are the last of mankind."
"It may be," said the Professor absently.
Then he added in hisdreamy voice, "What is all that at the end of the 'Dunciad'?
'Nor public flame; nor private, dares to shine;Nor human light is left, nor glimpse divine!
Lo!
thy dread Empire, Chaos, is restored;Light dies before thine uncreating word:Thy hand, great Anarch, lets the curtain fall;And universal darkness buries all."'
"Stop!"
cried Bull suddenly, "the gendarmes are out."
The low lights of the police station were indeed blotted andbroken with hurrying figures, and they heard through the darknessthe clash and jingle of a disciplined cavalry.
"They are charging the mob!"
cried Bull in ecstacy or alarm.
"No," said Syme, "they are formed along the parade."
"They have unslung their carbines," cried Bull dancing withexcitement.
"Yes," said Ratcliffe, "and they are going to fire on us."
As he spoke there came a long crackle of musketry, and bulletsseemed to hop like hailstones on the stones in front of them.
"The gendarmes have joined them!"
cried the Professor, and struckhis forehead.
"I am in the padded cell," said Bull solidly.
There was a long silence, and then Ratcliffe said, looking outover the swollen sea, all a sort of grey purple--"What does it matter who is mad or who is sane?
We shall all bedead soon."
Syme turned to him and said--"You are quite hopeless, then?"
Mr. Ratcliffe kept a stony silence; then at last he said quietly--"No; oddly enough I am not quite hopeless.
There is one insanelittle hope that I cannot get out of my mind.
The power of thiswhole planet is against us, yet I cannot help wondering whetherthis one silly little hope is hopeless yet."
"In what or whom is your hope?"
asked Syme with curiosity.
"In a man I never saw," said the other, looking at the leaden sea.
"I know what you mean," said Syme in a low voice, "the man in thedark room.
But Sunday must have killed him by now."
"Perhaps," said the other steadily; "but if so, he was the onlyman whom Sunday found it hard to kill."
"I heard what you said," said the Professor, with his back turned.
"I also am holding hard on to the thing I never saw."
All of a sudden Syme, who was standing as if blind withintrospective thought, swung round and cried out, like a manwaking from sleep--"Where is the Colonel?
I thought he was with us!"
"The Colonel!
Yes," cried Bull, "where on earth is the Colonel?"
"He went to speak to Renard," said the Professor.
"We cannot leave him among all those beasts," cried Syme.
"Let usdie like gentlemen if--""Do not pity the Colonel," said Ratcliffe, with a pale sneer.
"Heis extremely comfortable.
He is--""No!
no!
no!"
cried Syme in a kind of frenzy, "not the Colonel too!
I will never believe it!"
"Will you believe your eyes?"
asked the other, and pointed to thebeach.
Many of their pursuers had waded into the water shaking theirfists, but the sea was rough, and they could not reach the pier.
Two or three figures, however, stood on the beginning of the stonefootway, and seemed to be cautiously advancing down it.
The glareof a chance lantern lit up the faces of the two foremost.
One facewore a black half-mask, and under it the mouth was twisting aboutin such a madness of nerves that the black tuft of beard wriggledround and round like a restless, living thing.
The other was thered face and white moustache of Colonel Ducroix.
They were inearnest consultation.
"Yes, he is gone too," said the Professor, and sat down on astone.
"Everything's gone.
I'm gone!
I can't trust my own bodilymachinery.
I feel as if my own hand might fly up and strike me."
"When my hand flies up," said Syme, "it will strike somebodyelse," and he strode along the pier towards the Colonel, thesword in one hand and the lantern in the other.
As if to destroy the last hope or doubt, the Colonel, who saw himcoming, pointed his revolver at him and fired.
The shot missedSyme, but struck his sword, breaking it short at the hilt.
Symerushed on, and swung the iron lantern above his head.
"Judas before Herod!"
he said, and struck the Colonel down uponthe stones.
Then he turned to the Secretary, whose frightful mouthwas almost foaming now, and held the lamp high with so rigid andarresting a gesture, that the man was, as it were, frozen for amoment, and forced to hear.
"Do you see this lantern?"
cried Syme in a terrible voice.
"Do yousee the cross carved on it, and the flame inside?
You did not makeit.
You did not light it, Better men than you, men who couldbelieve and obey, twisted the entrails of iron and preserved thelegend of fire.
There is not a street you walk on, there is not athread you wear, that was not made as this lantern was, by denyingyour philosophy of dirt and rats.
You can make nothing.
You canonly destroy.
You will destroy mankind; you will destroy the world.
Let that suffice you.
Yet this one old Christian lantern you shallnot destroy.
It shall go where your empire of apes will never havethe wit to find it."
He struck the Secretary once with the lantern so that he staggered;and then, whirling it twice round his head, sent it flying far outto sea, where it flared like a roaring rocket and fell.
"Swords!"
shouted Syme, turning his flaming face ; to the threebehind him.
"Let us charge these dogs, for our time has come todie."
His three companions came after him sword in hand.
Syme's swordwas broken, but he rent a bludgeon from the fist of a fisherman,flinging him down.
In a moment they would have flung themselvesupon the face of the mob and perished, when an interruption came.
The Secretary, ever since Syme's speech, had stood with his handto his stricken head as if dazed; now he suddenly pulled off hisblack mask.
The pale face thus peeled in the lamplight revealed not so muchrage as astonishment.
He put up his hand with an anxious authority.
"There is some mistake," he said.
"Mr. Syme, I hardly think youunderstand your position.
I arrest you in the name of the law."
"Of the law?"
said Syme, and dropped his stick.
"Certainly!"
said the Secretary.
"I am a detective from ScotlandYard," and he took a small blue card from his pocket.
"And what do you suppose we are?"
asked the Professor, and threwup his arms.
"You," said the Secretary stiffly, "are, as I know for a fact,members of the Supreme Anarchist Council.
Disguised as one ofyou, I--"Dr. Bull tossed his sword into the sea.
"There never was any Supreme Anarchist Council," he said.
"We wereall a lot of silly policemen looking at each other.
And all thesenice people who have been peppering us with shot thought we werethe dynamiters.
I knew I couldn't be wrong about the mob," he said,beaming over the enormous multitude, which stretched away to thedistance on both sides.
"Vulgar people are never mad.
I'm vulgarmyself, and I know.
I am now going on shore to stand a drink toeverybody here."
CHAPTER XIIITHE PURSUIT OF THE PRESIDENTNEXT morning five bewildered but hilarious people took the boat forDover.
The poor old Colonel might have had some cause to complain,having been first forced to fight for two factions that didn'texist, and then knocked down with an iron lantern.
But he was amagnanimous old gentleman, and being much relieved that neitherparty had anything to do with dynamite, he saw them off on the pierwith great geniality.
The five reconciled detectives had a hundred details to explain toeach other.
The Secretary had to tell Syme how they had come towear masks originally in order to approach the supposed enemy asfellow-conspirators;Syme had to explain how they had fled with such swiftness througha civilised country.
But above all these matters of detail whichcould be explained, rose the central mountain of the matter thatthey could not explain.
What did it all mean?
If they were allharmless officers, what was Sunday?
If he had not seized the world,what on earth had he been up to?
Inspector Ratcliffe was stillgloomy about this.
"I can't make head or tail of old Sunday's little game any morethan you can," he said.
"But whatever else Sunday is, he isn'ta blameless citizen.
Damn it!
do you remember his face?"
"I grant you," answered Syme, "that I have never been able toforget it."
"Well," said the Secretary, "I suppose we can find out soon, fortomorrow we have our next general meeting.
You will excuse me,"he said, with a rather ghastly smile, "for being well acquaintedwith my secretarial duties."
"I suppose you are right," said the Professor reflectively.
"Isuppose we might find it out from him; but I confess that I shouldfeel a bit afraid of asking Sunday who he really is."
"Why," asked the Secretary, "for fear of bombs?"
"No," said the Professor, "for fear he might tell me."
"Let us have some drinks," said Dr. Bull, after a silence.
Throughout their whole journey by boat and train they were highlyconvivial, but they instinctively kept together.
Dr. Bull, who hadalways been the optimist of the party, endeavoured to persuade theother four that the whole company could take the same hansom cabfrom Victoria; but this was over-ruled, and they went in afour-wheeler, with Dr. Bull on the box, singing.
They finishedtheir journey at an hotel in Piccadilly Circus, so as to be closeto the early breakfast next morning in Leicester Square.
Yet eventhen the adventures of the day were not entirely over.
Dr. Bull,discontented with the general proposal to go to bed, had strolledout of the hotel at about eleven to see and taste some of thebeauties of London.
Twenty minutes afterwards, however, he cameback and made quite a clamour in the hall.
Syme, who tried atfirst to soothe him, was forced at last to listen to hiscommunication with quite new attention.
"I tell you I've seen him!"
said Dr. Bull, with thick emphasis.
"Whom?"
asked Syme quickly.
"Not the President?"
"Not so bad as that," said Dr. Bull, with unnecessary laughter,"not so bad as that.
I've got him here."
"Got whom here?"
asked Syme impatiently.
"Hairy man," said the other lucidly, "man that used to be hairyman--Gogol.
Here he is," and he pulled forward by a reluctantelbow the identical young man who five days before had marchedout of the Council with thin red hair and a pale face, the firstof all the sham anarchists who had been exposed.
"Why do you worry with me?"
he cried.
"You have expelled me as aspy."
"We are all spies!"
whispered Syme.
"We're all spies!"
shouted Dr. Bull.
"Come and have a drink."
Next morning the battalion of the reunited six marched stolidlytowards the hotel in Leicester Square.
"This is more cheerful," said Dr. Bull; "we are six men going toask one man what he means."
"I think it is a bit queerer than that," said Syme.
"I think itis six men going to ask one man what they mean."
They turned in silence into the Square, and though the hotel wasin the opposite corner, they saw at once the little balcony and afigure that looked too big for it.
He was sitting alone with benthead, poring over a newspaper.
But all his councillors, who hadcome to vote him down, crossed that Square as if they were watchedout of heaven by a hundred eyes.
They had disputed much upon their policy, about whether theyshould leave the unmasked Gogol without and begin diplomatically,or whether they should bring him in and blow up the gunpowder atonce.
The influence of Syme and Bull prevailed for the lattercourse, though the Secretary to the last asked them why theyattacked Sunday so rashly.
"My reason is quite simple," said Syme.
"I attack him rashlybecause I am afraid of him."
They followed Syme up the dark stair in silence, and they all cameout simultaneously into the broad sunlight of the morning and thebroad sunlight of Sunday's smile.
"Delightful!"
he said.
"So pleased to see you all.
What anexquisite day it is.
Is the Czar dead?"
The Secretary, who happened to be foremost, drew himself togetherfor a dignified outburst.
"No, sir," he said sternly "there has been no massacre.
I bring younews of no such disgusting spectacles."
"Disgusting spectacles?"
repeated the President, with a bright,inquiring smile.
"You mean Dr. Bull's spectacles?"
The Secretary choked for a moment, and the President went on witha sort of smooth appeal--"Of course, we all have our opinions and even our eyes, but reallyto call them disgusting before the man himself--"Dr. Bull tore off his spectacles and broke them on the table.
"My spectacles are blackguardly," he said, "but I'm not.
Look atmy face."
"I dare say it's the sort of face that grows on one," said thePresident, "in fact, it grows on you; and who am I to quarrelwith the wild fruits upon the Tree of Life?
I dare say it willgrow on me some day."
"We have no time for tomfoolery," said the Secretary, breaking insavagely.
"We have come to know what all this means.
Who are you?
What are you?
Why did you get us all here?
Do you know who andwhat we are?
Are you a half-witted man playing the conspirator,or are you a clever man playing the fool?
Answer me, I tell you."
"Candidates," murmured Sunday, "are only required to answer eightout of the seventeen questions on the paper.
As far as I can makeout, you want me to tell you what I am, and what you are, and whatthis table is, and what this Council is, and what this world isfor all I know.
Well, I will go so far as to rend the veil of onemystery.
If you want to know what you are, you are a set ofhighly well-intentioned young jackasses."
"And you," said Syme, leaning forward, "what are you?"
"I?
What am I?"
roared the President, and he rose slowly to anincredible height, like some enormous wave about to arch abovethem and break.
"You want to know what I am, do you?
Bull, youare a man of science.
Grub in the roots of those trees and findout the truth about them.
Syme, you are a poet.
Stare at thosemorning clouds.
But I tell you this, that you will have foundout the truth of the last tree and the top-most cloud before thetruth about me.
You will understand the sea, and I shall be stilla riddle; you shall know what the stars are, and not know what Iam.
Since the beginning of the world all men have hunted me likea wolf--kings and sages, and poets and lawgivers, all thechurches, and all the philosophies.
But I have never been caughtyet, and the skies will fall in the time I turn to bay.
I havegiven them a good run for their money, and I will now."
Before one of them could move, the monstrous man had swung himselflike some huge ourang-outang over the balustrade of the balcony.
Yet before he dropped he pulled himself up again as on a horizontalbar, and thrusting his great chin over the edge of the balcony,said solemnly--"There's one thing I'll tell you though about who I am.
I am theman in the dark room, who made you all policemen."
With that he fell from the balcony, bouncing on the stones belowlike a great ball of india-rubber, and went bounding off towardsthe corner of the Alhambra, where he hailed a hansom-cab and spranginside it.
The six detectives had been standing thunderstruck andlivid in the light of his last assertion; but when he disappearedinto the cab, Syme's practical senses returned to him, and leapingover the balcony so recklessly as almost to break his legs, hecalled another cab.
He and Bull sprang into the cab together, the Professor and theInspector into another, while the Secretary and the late Gogolscrambled into a third just in time to pursue the flying Syme, whowas pursuing the flying President.
Sunday led them a wild chasetowards the north-west, his cabman, evidently under the influenceof more than common inducements, urging the horse at breakneckspeed.
But Syme was in no mood for delicacies, and he stood up inhis own cab shouting, "Stop thief!"
until crowds ran along besidehis cab, and policemen began to stop and ask questions.
All thishad its influence upon the President's cabman, who began to lookdubious, and to slow down to a trot.
He opened the trap to talkreasonably to his fare, and in so doing let the long whip droopover the front of the cab.
Sunday leant forward, seized it, andjerked it violently out of the man's hand.
Then standing up infront of the cab himself, he lashed the horse and roared aloud,so that they went down the streets like a flying storm.
Throughstreet after street and square after square went whirling thispreposterous vehicle, in which the fare was urging the horse andthe driver trying desperately to stop it.
The other three cabscame after it (if the phrase be permissible of a cab) like pantinghounds.
Shops and streets shot by like rattling arrows.
At the highest ecstacy of speed, Sunday turned round on thesplashboard where he stood, and sticking his great grinning headout of the cab, with white hair whistling in the wind, he made ahorrible face at his pursuers, like some colossal urchin.
Thenraising his right hand swiftly, he flung a ball of paper in Syme'sface and vanished.
Syme caught the thing while instinctivelywarding it off, and discovered that it consisted of two crumpledpapers.
One was addressed to himself, and the other to Dr. Bull,with a very long, and it is to be feared partly ironical, stringof letters after his name.
Dr. Bull's address was, at any rate,considerably longer than his communication, for the communicationconsisted entirely of the words:--"What about Martin Tupper now?"
"What does the old maniac mean?"
asked Bull, staring at the words.
"What does yours say, Syme?"
Syme's message was, at any rate, longer, and ran as follows:--"No one would regret anything in the nature of an interference bythe Archdeacon more than I. I trust it will not come to that.
But,for the last time, where are your goloshes?
The thing is too bad,especially after what uncle said."
The President's cabman seemed to be regaining some control overhis horse, and the pursuers gained a little as they swept roundinto the Edgware Road.
And here there occurred what seemed to theallies a providential stoppage.
Traffic of every kind was swervingto right or left or stopping, for down the long road was comingthe unmistakable roar announcing the fire-engine, which in a fewseconds went by like a brazen thunderbolt.
But quick as it wentby, Sunday had bounded out of his cab, sprung at the fire-engine,caught it, slung himself on to it, and was seen as he disappearedin the noisy distance talking to the astonished fireman withexplanatory gestures.
"After him!"
howled Syme.
"He can't go astray now.
There's nomistaking a fire-engine."
The three cabmen, who had been stunned for a moment, whippedup their horses and slightly decreased the distance betweenthemselves and their disappearing prey.
The Presidentacknowledged this proximity by coming to the back of the car,bowing repeatedly, kissing his hand, and finally flinging aneatly-folded note into the bosom of Inspector Ratcliffe.
Whenthat gentleman opened it, not without impatience, he found itcontained the words:--"Fly at once.
The truth about your trouser-stretchers is known.
--A FRIEND."
The fire-engine had struck still farther to the north, into aregion that they did not recognise; and as it ran by a line of highrailings shadowed with trees, the six friends were startled, butsomewhat relieved, to see the President leap from the fire-engine,though whether through another whim or the increasing protest ofhis entertainers they could not see.
Before the three cabs,however, could reach up to the spot, he had gone up the highrailings like a huge grey cat, tossed himself over, and vanishedin a darkness of leaves.
Syme with a furious gesture stopped his cab, jumped out, andsprang also to the escalade.
When he had one leg over the fenceand his friends were following, he turned a face on them whichshone quite pale in the shadow.
"What place can this be?"
he asked.
"Can it be the old devil'shouse?
I've heard he has a house in North London."
"All the better," said the Secretary grimly, planting a foot ina foothold, "we shall find him at home."
"No, but it isn't that," said Syme, knitting his brows.
"I hearthe most horrible noises, like devils laughing and sneezing andblowing their devilish noses!"
"His dogs barking, of course," said the Secretary.
"Why not say his black-beetles barking!"
said Syme furiously,"snails barking!
geraniums barking!
Did you ever hear a dog barklike that?"
He held up his hand, and there came out of the thicket a longgrowling roar that seemed to get under the skin and freeze theflesh--a low thrilling roar that made a throbbing in the airall about them.
"The dogs of Sunday would be no ordinary dogs," said Gogol, andshuddered.
Syme had jumped down on the other side, but he still stoodlistening impatiently.
"Well, listen to that," he said, "is that a dog--anybody's dog?"
There broke upon their ear a hoarse screaming as of thingsprotesting and clamouring in sudden pain; and then, far offlike an echo, what sounded like a long nasal trumpet.
"Well, his house ought to be hell!"
said the Secretary; "and ifit is hell, I'm going in!"
and he sprang over the tall railingsalmost with one swing.
The others followed.
They broke through a tangle of plants andshrubs, and came out on an open path.
Nothing was in sight, butDr. Bull suddenly struck his hands together.
"Why, you asses," he cried, "it's the Zoo!"
As they were looking round wildly for any trace of their wildquarry, a keeper in uniform came running along the path with aman in plain clothes.
"Has it come this way?"
gasped the keeper.
"Has what?"
asked Syme.
"The elephant!"
cried the keeper.
"An elephant has gone mad andrun away!"
"He has run away with an old gentleman," said the other strangerbreathlessly, "a poor old gentleman with white hair! "
"What sort of old gentleman?"
asked Syme, with great curiosity.
"A very large and fat old gentleman in light grey clothes," saidthe keeper eagerly.
"Well," said Syme, "if he's that particular kind of old gentleman,if you're quite sure that he's a large and fat old gentleman ingrey clothes, you may take my word for it that the elephant hasnot run away with him.
He has run away with the elephant.
Theelephant is not made by God that could run away with him if hedid not consent to the elopement.
And, by thunder, there he is!"
There was no doubt about it this time.
Clean across the space ofgrass, about two hundred yards away, with a crowd screaming andscampering vainly at his heels, went a huge grey elephant at anawful stride, with his trunk thrown out as rigid as a ship'sbowsprit, and trumpeting like the trumpet of doom.
On the back ofthe bellowing and plunging animal sat President Sunday with allthe placidity of a sultan, but goading the animal to a furiousspeed with some sharp object in his hand.
"Stop him!"
screamed the populace.
"He'll be out of the gate!"
"Stop a landslide!"
said the keeper.
"He is out of the gate!"
And even as he spoke, a final crash and roar of terror announcedthat the great grey elephant had broken out of the gates of theZoological Gardens, and was careening down Albany Street like anew and swift sort of omnibus.
"Great Lord!"
cried Bull, "I never knew an elephant could go sofast.
Well, it must be hansom-cabs again if we are to keep him insight."
As they raced along to the gate out of which the elephant hadvanished, Syme felt a glaring panorama of the strange animals inthe cages which they passed.
Afterwards he thought it queer thathe should have seen them so clearly.
He remembered especiallyseeing pelicans, with their preposterous, pendant throats.
Hewondered why the pelican was the symbol of charity, except it wasthat it wanted a good deal of charity to admire a pelican.
Heremembered a hornbill, which was simply a huge yellow beak with asmall bird tied on behind it.
The whole gave him a sensation, thevividness of which he could not explain, that Nature was alwaysmaking quite mysterious jokes.
Sunday had told them that theywould understand him when they had understood the stars.
Hewondered whether even the archangels understood the hornbill.
The six unhappy detectives flung themselves into cabs and followedthe elephant sharing the terror which he spread through the longstretch of the streets.
This time Sunday did not turn round, butoffered them the solid stretch of his unconscious back, whichmaddened them, if possible, more than his previous mockeries.
Justbefore they came to Baker Street, however, he was seen to throwsomething far up into the air, as a boy does a ball meaning tocatch it again.
But at their rate of racing it fell far behind,just by the cab containing Gogol; and in faint hope of a clue orfor some impulse unexplainable, he stopped his cab so as to pick itup.
It was addressed to himself, and was quite a bulky parcel.
Onexamination, however, its bulk was found to consist of thirty-threepieces of paper of no value wrapped one round the other.
When thelast covering was torn away it reduced itself to a small slip ofpaper, on which was written:--"The word, I fancy, should be 'pink'."
The man once known as Gogol said nothing, but the movements of hishands and feet were like those of a man urging a horse to renewedefforts.
Through street after street, through district after district, wentthe prodigy of the flying elephant, calling crowds to every window,and driving the traffic left and right.
And still through all thisinsane publicity the three cabs toiled after it, until they came tobe regarded as part of a procession, and perhaps the advertisementof a circus.
They went at such a rate that distances were shortenedbeyond belief, and Syme saw the Albert Hall in Kensington when hethought that he was still in Paddington.
The animal's pace was evenmore fast and free through the empty, aristocratic streets of SouthKensington, and he finally headed towards that part of the sky-linewhere the enormous Wheel of Earl's Court stood up in the sky.
Thewheel grew larger and larger, till it filled heaven like the wheelof stars.
The beast outstripped the cabs.
They lost him round severalcorners, and when they came to one of the gates of the Earl's CourtExhibition they found themselves finally blocked.
In front of themwas an enormous crowd; in the midst of it was an enormous elephant,heaving and shuddering as such shapeless creatures do.
But thePresident had disappeared.
"Where has he gone to?"
asked Syme, slipping to the ground.
"Gentleman rushed into the Exhibition, sir!"
said an official in adazed manner.
Then he added in an injured voice: "Funny gentleman,sir.
Asked me to hold his horse, and gave me this."
He held out with distaste a piece of folded paper, addressed: "Tothe Secretary of the Central Anarchist Council."
The Secretary, raging, rent it open, and found written inside it:--"When the herring runs a mile,Let the Secretary smile;When the herring tries to fly,Let the Secretary die.
Rustic Proverb."
"Why the eternal crikey," began the Secretary, "did you let theman in?
Do people commonly come to you Exhibition riding on madelephants?
Do--""Look!"
shouted Syme suddenly.
"Look over there!"
"Look at what?"
asked the Secretary savagely.
"Look at the captive balloon!"
said Syme, and pointed in a frenzy.
"Why the blazes should I look at a captive balloon?'
demanded theSecretary.
"What is there queer about a captive balloon?"
"Nothing," said Syme, "except that it isn't captive!'
They all turned their eyes to where the balloon swung and swelledabove the Exhibition on a string, like a child's balloon.
A secondafterwards the string came in two just under the car, and theballoon, broken loose, floated away with the freedom of a soapbubble.
"Ten thousand devils!"
shrieked the Secretary.
"He's got into it!"
and he shook his fists at the sky.
The balloon, borne by some chance wind, came right above them, andthey could see the great white head of the President peering overthe side and looking benevolently down on them.
"God bless my soul!"
said the Professor with the elderly mannerthat he could never disconnect from his bleached beard andparchment face.
"God bless my soul!
I seemed to fancy thatsomething fell on the top of my hat!"
He put up a trembling hand and took from that shelf a piece oftwisted paper, which he opened absently only to find it inscribedwith a true lover's knot and, the words:--"Your beauty has not left me indifferent.--From LITTLE SNOWDROP. "
There was a short silence, and then Syme said, biting his beard--"I'm not beaten yet.
The blasted thing must come down somewhere.
Let's follow it!"
CHAPTER XIVTHE SIX PHILOSOPHERSACROSS green fields, and breaking through blooming hedges, toiledsix draggled detectives, about five miles out of London.
Theoptimist of the party had at first proposed that they shouldfollow the balloon across South England in hansom-cabs.
But hewas ultimately convinced of the persistent refusal of the balloonto follow the roads, and the still more persistent refusal of thecabmen to follow the balloon.
Consequently the tireless thoughexasperated travellers broke through black thickets and ploughedthrough ploughed fields till each was turned into a figure toooutrageous to be mistaken for a tramp.
Those green hills ofSurrey saw the final collapse and tragedy of the admirable lightgrey suit in which Syme had set out from Saffron Park.
His silkhat was broken over his nose by a swinging bough, his coat-tailswere torn to the shoulder by arresting thorns, the clay ofEngland was splashed up to his collar; but he still carried hisyellow beard forward with a silent and furious determination, andhis eyes were still fixed on that floating ball of gas, which inthe full flush of sunset seemed coloured like a sunset cloud.
"After all," he said, "it is very beautiful!"
"It is singularly and strangely beautiful!"
said the Professor.
"Iwish the beastly gas-bag would burst!"
"No," said Dr. Bull, "I hope it won't.
It might hurt the old boy."
"Hurt him!"
said the vindictive Professor, "hurt him!
Not as muchas I'd hurt him if I could get up with him.
Little Snowdrop!"
"I don't want him hurt, somehow," said Dr. Bull.
"What!"
cried the Secretary bitterly.
"Do you believe all that taleabout his being our man in the dark room?
Sunday would say he wasanybody."
"I don't know whether I believe it or not," said Dr. Bull.
"But itisn't that that I mean.
I can't wish old Sunday's balloon to burstbecause--""Well," said Syme impatiently, "because?"
"Well, because he's so jolly like a balloon himself," said Dr. Bulldesperately.
"I don't understand a word of all that idea of hisbeing the same man who gave us all our blue cards.
It seems to makeeverything nonsense.
But I don't care who knows it, I always had asympathy for old Sunday himself, wicked as he was.
Just as if hewas a great bouncing baby.
How can I explain what my queer sympathywas?
It didn't prevent my fighting him like hell!
Shall I make itclear if I say that I liked him because he was so fat?"
"You will not," said the Secretary.
"I've got it now," cried Bull, "it was because he was so fat and solight.
Just like a balloon.
We always think of fat people as heavy,but he could have danced against a sylph.
I see now what I mean.
Moderate strength is shown in violence, supreme strength is shownin levity.
It was like the old speculations--what would happen ifan elephant could leap up in the sky like a grasshopper?"
"Our elephant," said Syme, looking upwards, "has leapt into thesky like a grasshopper."
"And somehow," concluded Bull, "that's why I can't help liking oldSunday.
No, it's not an admiration of force, or any silly thinglike that.
There is a kind of gaiety in the thing, as if he werebursting with some good news.
Haven't you sometimes felt it on aspring day?
You know Nature plays tricks, but somehow that dayproves they are good-natured tricks.
I never read the Bible myself,but that part they laugh at is literal truth, 'Why leap ye, ye highhills?'
The hills do leap--at least, they try to.
.
.
.
Why do Ilike Sunday?
.
.
.
how can I tell you?
.
.
.
because he's such aBounder."
There was a long silence, and then the Secretary said in a curious,strained voice--"You do not know Sunday at all.
Perhaps it is because you arebetter than I, and do not know hell.
I was a fierce fellow, and atrifle morbid from the first.
The man who sits in darkness, andwho chose us all, chose me because I had all the crazy look of aconspirator--because my smile went crooked, and my eyes weregloomy, even when I smiled.
But there must have been something inme that answered to the nerves in all these anarchic men.
For whenI first saw Sunday he expressed to me, not your airy vitality, butsomething both gross and sad in the Nature of Things.
I found himsmoking in a twilight room, a room with brown blind down,infinitely more depressing than the genial darkness in which ourmaster lives.
He sat there on a bench, a huge heap of a man, darkand out of shape.
He listened to all my words without speaking oreven stirring.
I poured out my most passionate appeals, and askedmy most eloquent questions.
Then, after a long silence, the Thingbegan to shake, and I thought it was shaken by some secret malady.
It shook like a loathsome and living jelly.
It reminded me ofeverything I had ever read about the base bodies that are theorigin of life--the deep sea lumps and protoplasm.
It seemed likethe final form of matter, the most shapeless and the most shameful.
I could only tell myself, from its shudderings, that it wassomething at least that such a monster could be miserable.
Andthen it broke upon me that the bestial mountain was shaking witha lonely laughter, and the laughter was at me.
Do you ask me toforgive him that?
It is no small thing to be laughed at bysomething at once lower and stronger than oneself."
"Surely you fellows are exaggerating wildly," cut in the clearvoice of Inspector Ratcliffe.
"President Sunday is a terriblefellow for one's intellect, but he is not such a Barnum's freakphysically as you make out.
He received me in an ordinary office,in a grey check coat, in broad daylight.
He talked to me in anordinary way.
But I'll tell you what is a trifle creepy aboutSunday.
His room is neat, his clothes are neat, everything seemsin order; but he's absent-minded.
Sometimes his great bright eyesgo quite blind.
For hours he forgets that you are there.
Nowabsent-mindedness is just a bit too awful in a bad man.
We thinkof a wicked man as vigilant.
We can't think of a wicked man who ishonestly and sincerely dreamy, because we daren't think of a wickedman alone with himself.
An absentminded man means a good-naturedman.
It means a man who, if he happens to see you, will apologise.
But how will you bear an absentminded man who, if he happens to seeyou, will kill you?
That is what tries the nerves, abstractioncombined with cruelty.
Men have felt it sometimes when they wentthrough wild forests, and felt that the animals there were at onceinnocent and pitiless.
They might ignore or slay.
How would youlike to pass ten mortal hours in a parlour with an absent-mindedtiger?"
"And what do you think of Sunday, Gogol?"
asked Syme.
"I don't think of Sunday on principle," said Gogol simply, "anymore than I stare at the sun at noonday."
"Well, that is a point of view," said Syme thoughtfully.
"What doyou say, Professor?"
The Professor was walking with bent head and trailing stick, andhe did not answer at all.
"Wake up, Professor!"
said Syme genially.
"Tell us what you thinkof Sunday."
The Professor spoke at last very slowly.
"I think something," he said, "that I cannot say clearly.
Or,rather, I think something that I cannot even think clearly.
Butit is something like this.
My early life, as you know, was a bittoo large and loose.
Well, when I saw Sunday's face I thought it was too large--everybody does, but I also thought it was too loose.
The facewas so big, that one couldn't focus it or make it a face at all.
The eye was so far away from the nose, that it wasn't an eye.
The mouth was so much by itself, that one had to think of it byitself.
The whole thing is too hard to explain."
He paused for a little, still trailing his stick, and then wenton--"But put it this way.
Walking up a road at night, I have seen alamp and a lighted window and a cloud make together a most completeand unmistakable face.
If anyone in heaven has that face I shallknow him again.
Yet when I walked a little farther I found thatthere was no face, that the window was ten yards away, the lamp tenhundred yards, the cloud beyond the world.
Well, Sunday's faceescaped me; it ran away to right and left, as such chance picturesrun away.
And so his face has made me, somehow, doubt whether thereare any faces.
I don't know whether your face, Bull, is a face or acombination in perspective.
Perhaps one black disc of your beastlyglasses is quite close and another fifty miles away.
Oh, the doubtsof a materialist are not worth a dump.
Sunday has taught me thelast and the worst doubts, the doubts of a spiritualist.
I am aBuddhist, I suppose; and Buddhism is not a creed, it is a doubt.
Mypoor dear Bull, I do not believe that you really have a face.
Ihave not faith enough to believe in matter."
Syme's eyes were still fixed upon the errant orb, which, reddenedin the evening light, looked like some rosier and more innocentworld.
"Have you noticed an odd thing," he said, "about all yourdescriptions?
Each man of you finds Sunday quite different, yeteach man of you can only find one thing to compare him to--theuniverse itself.
Bull finds him like the earth in spring, Gogollike the sun at noonday.
The Secretary is reminded of the shapelessprotoplasm, and the Inspector of the carelessness of virginforests.
The Professor says he is like a changing landscape.
Thisis queer, but it is queerer still that I also have had my oddnotion about the President, and I also find that I think of Sundayas I think of the whole world."
"Get on a little faster, Syme," said Bull; "never mind theballoon."
"When I first saw Sunday," said Syme slowly, "I only saw his back;and when I saw his back, I knew he was the worst man in the world.
His neck and shoulders were brutal, like those of some apish god.
His head had a stoop that was hardly human, like the stoop of anox.
In fact, I had at once the revolting fancy that this was nota man at all, but a beast dressed up in men's clothes."
"Get on," said Dr. Bull.
"And then the queer thing happened.
I had seen his back from thestreet, as he sat in the balcony.
Then I entered the hotel, andcoming round the other side of him, saw his face in the sunlight.
His face frightened me, as it did everyone; but not because it wasbrutal, not because it was evil.
On the contrary, it frightened mebecause it was so beautiful, because it was so good."
"Syme," exclaimed the Secretary, "are you ill?"
"It was like the face of some ancient archangel, judging justlyafter heroic wars.
There was laughter in the eyes, and in the mouthhonour and sorrow.
There was the same white hair, the same great,grey-clad shoulders that I had seen from behind.
But when I saw himfrom behind I was certain he was an animal, and when I saw him infront I knew he was a god."
"Pan," said the Professor dreamily, "was a god and an animal."
"Then, and again and always," went on Syme like a man talking tohimself, "that has been for me the mystery of Sunday, and it isalso the mystery of the world.
When I see the horrible back, I amsure the noble face is but a mask.
When I see the face but for aninstant, I know the back is only a jest.
Bad is so bad, that wecannot but think good an accident; good is so good, that we feelcertain that evil could be explained.
But the whole came to a kindof crest yesterday when I raced Sunday for the cab, and was justbehind him all the way."
"Had you time for thinking then?"
asked Ratcliffe.
"Time," replied Syme, "for one outrageous thought.
I was suddenlypossessed with the idea that the blind, blank back of his headreally was his face--an awful, eyeless face staring at me!
And Ifancied that the figure running in front of me was really a figurerunning backwards, and dancing as he ran."
"Horrible!"
said Dr. Bull, and shuddered.
"Horrible is not the word," said Syme.
"It was exactly the worstinstant of my life.
And yet ten minutes afterwards, when he put hishead out of the cab and made a grimace like a gargoyle, I knew thathe was only like a father playing hide-and-seek with his children."
"It is a long game," said the Secretary, and frowned at his brokenboots.
"Listen to me," cried Syme with extraordinary emphasis.
"Shall Itell you the secret of the whole world?
It is that we have onlyknown the back of the world.
We see everything from behind, and itlooks brutal.
That is not a tree, but the back of a tree.
That isnot a cloud, but the back of a cloud.
Cannot you see thateverything is stooping and hiding a face?
If we could only getround in front--""Look!"
cried out Bull clamorously, "the balloon is coming down!"
There was no need to cry out to Syme, who had never taken his eyesoff it.
He saw the great luminous globe suddenly stagger in thesky, right itself, and then sink slowly behind the trees like asetting sun.
The man called Gogol, who had hardly spoken through all their wearytravels, suddenly threw up his hands like a lost spirit.
"He is dead!"
he cried.
"And now I know he was my friend--my friendin the dark!"
"Dead!"
snorted the Secretary.
"You will not find him dead easily.
If he has been tipped out of the car, we shall find him rolling asa colt rolls in a field, kicking his legs for fun."
"Clashing his hoofs," said the Professor.
"The colts do, and so didPan."
"Pan again!"
said Dr. Bull irritably.
"You seem to think Pan iseverything."
"So he is," said the Professor, "in Greek.
He means everything."
"Don't forget," said the Secretary, looking down, "that he alsomeans Panic."
Syme had stood without hearing any of the exclamations.
"It fell over there," he said shortly.
"Let us follow it!"
Then he added with an indescribable gesture--"Oh, if he has cheated us all by getting killed!
It would be likeone of his larks."
He strode off towards the distant trees with a new energy, his ragsand ribbons fluttering in the wind.
The others followed him in amore footsore and dubious manner.
And almost at the same moment allsix men realised that they were not alone in the little field.
Across the square of turf a tall man was advancing towards them,leaning on a strange long staff like a sceptre.
He was clad in afine but old-fashioned suit with knee-breeches; its colour wasthat shade between blue, violet and grey which can be seen incertain shadows of the woodland.
His hair was whitish grey, andat the first glance, taken along with his knee-breeches, lookedas if it was powdered.
His advance was very quiet; but for thesilver frost upon his head, he might have been one to the shadowsof the wood.
"Gentlemen," he said, "my master has a carriage waiting for you inthe road just by."
"Who is your master?"
asked Syme, standing quite still.
"I was told you knew his name," said the man respectfully.
There was a silence, and then the Secretary said--"Where is this carriage?"
"It has been waiting only a few moments," said the stranger.
"Mymaster has only just come home."
Syme looked left and right upon the patch of green field in whichhe found himself.
The hedges were ordinary hedges, the trees seemedordinary trees; yet he felt like a man entrapped in fairyland.
He looked the mysterious ambassador up and down, but he coulddiscover nothing except that the man's coat was the exact colour ofthe purple shadows, and that the man's face was the exact colour ofthe red and brown and golden sky.
"Show us the place," Syme said briefly, and without a word the manin the violet coat turned his back and walked towards a gap in thehedge, which let in suddenly the light of a white road.
As the six wanderers broke out upon this thoroughfare, they saw thewhite road blocked by what looked like a long row of carriages,such a row of carriages as might close the approach to some housein Park Lane.
Along the side of these carriages stood a rank ofsplendid servants, all dressed in the grey-blue uniform, and allhaving a certain quality of stateliness and freedom which would notcommonly belong to the servants of a gentleman, but rather to theofficials and ambassadors of a great king.
There were no less thansix carriages waiting, one for each of the tattered and miserableband.
All the attendants (as if in court-dress) wore swords, and aseach man crawled into his carriage they drew them, and saluted witha sudden blaze of steel.
"What can it all mean?"
asked Bull of Syme as they separated.
"Isthis another joke of Sunday's?"
"I don't know," said Syme as he sank wearily back in the cushionsof his carriage; "but if it is, it's one of the jokes you talkabout.
It's a good-natured one."
The six adventurers had passed through many adventures, but not onehad carried them so utterly off their feet as this last adventureof comfort.
They had all become inured to things going roughly; butthings suddenly going smoothly swamped them.
They could not evenfeebly imagine what the carriages were; it was enough for them toknow that they were carriages, and carriages with cushions.
Theycould not conceive who the old man was who had led them; but it wasquite enough that he had certainly led them to the carriages.
Syme drove through a drifting darkness of trees in utterabandonment.
It was typical of him that while he had carried hisbearded chin forward fiercely so long as anything could be done,when the whole business was taken out of his hands he fell backon the cushions in a frank collapse.
Very gradually and very vaguely he realised into what rich roadsthe carriage was carrying him.
He saw that they passed the stonegates of what might have been a park, that they began gradually toclimb a hill which, while wooded on both sides, was somewhat moreorderly than a forest.
Then there began to grow upon him, as upon aman slowly waking from a healthy sleep, a pleasure in everything.
He felt that the hedges were what hedges should be, living walls;that a hedge is like a human army, disciplined, but all the morealive.
He saw high elms behind the hedges, and vaguely thought howhappy boys would be climbing there.
Then his carriage took a turnof the path, and he saw suddenly and quietly, like a long, low,sunset cloud, a long, low house, mellow in the mild light ofsunset.
All the six friends compared notes afterwards andquarrelled; but they all agreed that in some unaccountable way theplace reminded them of their boyhood.
It was either this elm-topor that crooked path, it was either this scrap of orchard or thatshape of a window; but each man of them declared that he couldremember this place before he could remember his mother.
When the carriages eventually rolled up to a large, low, cavernousgateway, another man in the same uniform, but wearing a silver staron the grey breast of his coat, came out to meet them.
Thisimpressive person said to the bewildered Syme--"Refreshments are provided for you in your room."
Syme, under the influence of the same mesmeric sleep of amazement,went up the large oaken stairs after the respectful attendant.
Heentered a splendid suite of apartments that seemed to be designedspecially for him.
He walked up to a long mirror with the ordinaryinstinct of his class, to pull his tie straight or to smooth hishair; and there he saw the frightful figure that he was--bloodrunning down his face from where the bough had struck him, his hairstanding out like yellow rags of rank grass, his clothes torn intolong, wavering tatters.
At once the whole enigma sprang up, simplyas the question of how he had got there, and how he was to get outagain.
Exactly at the same moment a man in blue, who had beenappointed as his valet, said very solemnly--"I have put out your clothes, sir."
"Clothes!"
said Syme sardonically.
"I have no clothes exceptthese," and he lifted two long strips of his frock-coat infascinating festoons, and made a movement as if to twirl likea ballet girl.
"My master asks me to say," said the attendant, that there is afancy dress ball tonight, and that he desires you to put on thecostume that I have laid out.
Meanwhile, sir, there is a bottleof Burgundy and some cold pheasant, which he hopes you will notrefuse, as it is some hours before supper."
"Cold pheasant is a good thing," said Syme reflectively, "andBurgundy is a spanking good thing.
But really I do not want eitherof them so much as I want to know what the devil all this means,and what sort of costume you have got laid out for me.
Where isit?"
The servant lifted off a kind of ottoman a long peacock-bluedrapery, rather of the nature of a domino, on the front of whichwas emblazoned a large golden sun, and which was splashed hereand there with flaming stars and crescents.
"You're to be dressed as Thursday, sir," said the valet somewhataffably.
"Dressed as Thursday!"
said Syme in meditation.
"It doesn't sounda warm costume."
"Oh, yes, sir," said the other eagerly, "the Thursday costume isquite warm, sir.
It fastens up to the chin."
"Well, I don't understand anything," said Syme, sighing.
"I havebeen used so long to uncomfortable adventures that comfortableadventures knock me out.
Still, I may be allowed to ask why Ishould be particularly like Thursday in a green frock spottedall over with the sun and moon.
Those orbs, I think, shine onother days.
I once saw the moon on Tuesday, I remember."
"Beg pardon, sir," said the valet, "Bible also provided for you,"and with a respectful and rigid finger he pointed out a passagein the first chapter of Genesis.
Syme read it wondering.
It wasthat in which the fourth day of the week is associated with thecreation of the sun and moon.
Here, however, they reckoned froma Christian Sunday.
"This is getting wilder and wilder," said Syme, as he sat downin a chair.
"Who are these people who provide cold pheasant andBurgundy, and green clothes and Bibles?
Do they provideeverything?"
"Yes, sir, everything," said the attendant gravely.
"Shall I helpyou on with your costume?"
"Oh, hitch the bally thing on!"
said Syme impatiently.
But though he affected to despise the mummery, he felt a curiousfreedom and naturalness in his movements as the blue and goldgarment fell about him; and when he found that he had to wear asword, it stirred a boyish dream.
As he passed out of the room heflung the folds across his shoulder with a gesture, his swordstood out at an angle, and he had all the swagger of a troubadour.
For these disguises did not disguise, but reveal.
CHAPTER XVTHE ACCUSERAS Syme strode along the corridor he saw the Secretary standing atthe top of a great flight of stairs.
The man had never looked sonoble.
He was draped in a long robe of starless black, down thecentre of which fell a band or broad stripe of pure white, like asingle shaft of light.
The whole looked like some very severeecclesiastical vestment.
There was no need for Syme to search hismemory or the Bible in order to remember that the first day ofcreation marked the mere creation of light out of darkness.
Thevestment itself would alone have suggested the symbol; and Symefelt also how perfectly this pattern of pure white and blackexpressed the soul of the pale and austere Secretary, with hisinhuman veracity and his cold frenzy, which made him so easilymake war on the anarchists, and yet so easily pass for one ofthem.
Syme was scarcely surprised to notice that, amid all theease and hospitality of their new surroundings, this man's eyeswere still stern.
No smell of ale or orchards could make theSecretary cease to ask a reasonable question.
If Syme had been able to see himself, he would have realised thathe, too, seemed to be for the first time himself and no one else.
For if the Secretary stood for that philosopher who loves theoriginal and formless light, Syme was a type of the poet who seeksalways to make the light in special shapes, to split it up intosun and star.
The philosopher may sometimes love the infinite; thepoet always loves the finite.
For him the great moment is not thecreation of light, but the creation of the sun and moon.
As they descended the broad stairs together they overtookRatcliffe, who was clad in spring green like a huntsman, and thepattern upon whose garment was a green tangle of trees.
For hestood for that third day on which the earth and green things weremade, and his square, sensible face, with its not unfriendlycynicism, seemed appropriate enough to it.
They were led out of another broad and low gateway into a verylarge old English garden, full of torches and bonfires, by thebroken light of which a vast carnival of people were dancing inmotley dress.
Syme seemed to see every shape in Nature imitatedin some crazy costume.
There was a man dressed as a windmill withenormous sails, a man dressed as an elephant, a man dressed as aballoon; the two last, together, seemed to keep the thread oftheir farcical adventures.
Syme even saw, with a queer thrill,one dancer dressed like an enormous hornbill, with a beak twiceas big as himself--the queer bird which had fixed itself on hisfancy like a living question while he was rushing down the longroad at the Zoological Gardens.
There were a thousand other suchobjects, however.
There was a dancing lamp-post, a dancing appletree, a dancing ship.
One would have thought that the untamabletune of some mad musician had set all the common objects of fieldand street dancing an eternal jig.
And long afterwards, when Symewas middle-aged and at rest, he could never see one of thoseparticular objects--a lamppost, or an apple tree, or a windmill--without thinking that it was a strayed reveller from that revelof masquerade.
On one side of this lawn, alive with dancers, was a sort of greenbank, like the terrace in such old-fashioned gardens.
Along this, in a kind of crescent, stood seven great chairs, thethrones of the seven days.
Gogol and Dr. Bull were already in theirseats; the Professor was just mounting to his.
Gogol, or Tuesday,had his simplicity well symbolised by a dress designed upon thedivision of the waters, a dress that separated upon his foreheadand fell to his feet, grey and silver, like a sheet of rain.
TheProfessor, whose day was that on which the birds and fishes--theruder forms of life--were created, had a dress of dim purple, overwhich sprawled goggle-eyed fishes and outrageous tropical birds,the union in him of unfathomable fancy and of doubt.
Dr. Bull, thelast day of Creation, wore a coat covered with heraldic animals inred and gold, and on his crest a man rampant.
He lay back in hischair with a broad smile, the picture of an optimist in hiselement.
One by one the wanderers ascended the bank and sat in theirstrange seats.
As each of them sat down a roar of enthusiasm rosefrom the carnival, such as that with which crowds receive kings.
Cups were clashed and torches shaken, and feathered hats flung inthe air.
The men for whom these thrones were reserved were mencrowned with some extraordinary laurels.
But the central chair wasempty.
Syme was on the left hand of it and the Secretary on the right.
The Secretary looked across the empty throne at Syme, and said,compressing his lips--"We do not know yet that he is not dead in a field."
Almost as Syme heard the words, he saw on the sea of human faces infront of him a frightful and beautiful alteration, as if heaven hadopened behind his head.
But Sunday had only passed silently alongthe front like a shadow, and had sat in the central seat.
He wasdraped plainly, in a pure and terrible white, and his hair was likea silver flame on his forehead.
For a long time--it seemed for hours--that huge masquerade ofmankind swayed and stamped in front of them to marching andexultant music.
Every couple dancing seemed a separate romance;it might be a fairy dancing with a pillar-box, or a peasant girldancing with the moon; but in each case it was, somehow, asabsurd as Alice in Wonderland, yet as grave and kind as a lovestory.
At last, however, the thick crowd began to thin itself.
Couples strolled away into the garden-walks, or began to drifttowards that end of the building where stood smoking, in hugepots like fish-kettles, some hot and scented mixtures of old aleor wine.
Above all these, upon a sort of black framework on theroof of the house, roared in its iron basket a gigantic bonfire,which lit up the land for miles.
It flung the homely effect offirelight over the face of vast forests of grey or brown, and itseemed to fill with warmth even the emptiness of upper night.
Yet this also, after a time, was allowed to grow fainter; thedim groups gathered more and more round the great cauldrons, orpassed, laughing and clattering, into the inner passages of thatancient house.
Soon there were only some ten loiterers in thegarden; soon only four.
Finally the last stray merry-maker raninto the house whooping to his companions.
The fire faded, andthe slow, strong stars came out.
And the seven strange men wereleft alone, like seven stone statues on their chairs of stone.
Not one of them had spoken a word.
They seemed in no haste to do so, but heard in silence the hum ofinsects and the distant song of one bird.
Then Sunday spoke, butso dreamily that he might have been continuing a conversationrather than beginning one.
"We will eat and drink later," he said.
"Let us remain together alittle, we who have loved each other so sadly, and have fought solong.
I seem to remember only centuries of heroic war, in whichyou were always heroes--epic on epic, iliad on iliad, and youalways brothers in arms.
Whether it was but recently (for time isnothing), or at the beginning of the world, I sent you out towar.
I sat in the darkness, where there is not any created thing,and to you I was only a voice commanding valour and an unnaturalvirtue.
You heard the voice in the dark, and you never heard itagain.
The sun in heaven denied it, the earth and sky denied it,all human wisdom denied it.
And when I met you in the daylight Idenied it myself."
Syme stirred sharply in his seat, but otherwise there was silence,and the incomprehensible went on.
"But you were men.
You did not forget your secret honour, thoughthe whole cosmos turned an engine of torture to tear it out ofyou.
I knew how near you were to hell.
I know how you, Thursday,crossed swords with King Satan, and how you, Wednesday, named mein the hour without hope."
There was complete silence in the starlit garden, and then theblack-browed Secretary, implacable, turned in his chair towardsSunday, and said in a harsh voice--"Who and what are you?"
"I am the Sabbath," said the other without moving.
"I am the peaceof God."
The Secretary started up, and stood crushing his costly robe in hishand.
"I know what you mean," he cried, "and it is exactly that that Icannot forgive you.
I know you are contentment, optimism, what dothey call the thing, an ultimate reconciliation.
Well, I am notreconciled.
If you were the man in the dark room, why were you alsoSunday, an offense to the sunlight?
If you were from the first ourfather and our friend, why were you also our greatest enemy?
Wewept, we fled in terror; the iron entered into our souls--and youare the peace of God!
Oh, I can forgive God His anger, though itdestroyed nations; but I cannot forgive Him His peace."
Sunday answered not a word, but very slowly he turned his face ofstone upon Syme as if asking a question.
"No," said Syme, "I do not feel fierce like that.
I am gratefulto you, not only for wine and hospitality here, but for many afine scamper and free fight.
But I should like to know.
My souland heart are as happy and quiet here as this old garden, but myreason is still crying out.
I should like to know."
Sunday looked at Ratcliffe, whose clear voice said--"It seems so silly that you should have been on both sides andfought yourself."
Bull said--"l understand nothing, but I am happy.
In fact, I am going tosleep."
"I am not happy," said the Professor with his head in his hands,"because I do not understand.
You let me stray a little too nearto hell."
And then Gogol said, with the absolute simplicity of a child--"I wish I knew why I was hurt so much."
Still Sunday said nothing, but only sat with his mighty chin uponhis hand, and gazed at the distance.
Then at last he said--"I have heard your complaints in order.
And here, I think, comesanother to complain, and we will hear him also."
The falling fire in the great cresset threw a last long gleam, likea bar of burning gold, across the dim grass.
Against this fieryband was outlined in utter black the advancing legs of a black-cladfigure.
He seemed to have a fine close suit with knee-breeches suchas that which was worn by the servants of the house, only that itwas not blue, but of this absolute sable.
He had, like theservants, a kind of word by his side.
It was only when he had comequite close to the crescent of the seven and flung up his face tolook at them, that Syme saw, with thunder-struck clearness, thatthe face was the broad, almost ape-like face of his old friendGregory, with its rank red hair and its insulting smile.
"Gregory!"
gasped Syme, half-rising from his seat.
"Why, this isthe real anarchist!"
"Yes," said Gregory, with a great and dangerous restraint, "I amthe real anarchist."
"'Now there was a day,'" murmured Bull, who seemed really to havefallen asleep, "'when the sons of God came to present themselvesbefore the Lord, and Satan came also among them.'"
"You are right," said Gregory, and gazed all round.
"I am adestroyer.
I would destroy the world if I could."
A sense of a pathos far under the earth stirred up in Syme, andhe spoke brokenly and without sequence.
"Oh, most unhappy man," he cried, "try to be happy!
You have redhair like your sister."
"My red hair, like red flames, shall burn up the world," saidGregory.
"I thought I hated everything more than common men canhate anything; but I find that I do not hate everything so muchas I hate you! "
"I never hated you," said Syme very sadly.
Then out of this unintelligible creature the last thunders broke.
"You!"
he cried.
"You never hated because you never lived.
I knowwhat you are all of you, from first to last--you are the peoplein power!
You are the police--the great fat, smiling men in blueand buttons!
You are the Law, and you have never been broken.
Butis there a free soul alive that does not long to break you, onlybecause you have never been broken?
We in revolt talk all kind ofnonsense doubtless about this crime or that crime of theGovernment.
It is all folly!
The only crime of the Government isthat it governs.
The unpardonable sin of the supreme power isthat it is supreme.
I do not curse you for being cruel.
I do notcurse you (though I might) for being kind.
I curse you for beingsafe!
You sit in your chairs of stone, and have never come downfrom them.
You are the seven angels of heaven, and you have hadno troubles.
Oh, I could forgive you everything, you that ruleall mankind, if I could feel for once that you had suffered forone hour a real agony such as I--"Syme sprang to his feet, shaking from head to foot.
"I see everything," he cried, "everything that there is.
Why doeseach thing on the earth war against each other thing?
Why doeseach small thing in the world have to fight against the worlditself?
Why does a fly have to fight the whole universe?
Why doesa dandelion have to fight the whole universe?
For the same reasonthat I had to be alone in the dreadful Council of the Days.
Sothat each thing that obeys law may have the glory and isolation ofthe anarchist.
So that each man fighting for order may be as braveand good a man as the dynamiter.
So that the real lie of Satan maybe flung back in the face of this blasphemer, so that by tears andtorture we may earn the right to say to this man, 'You lie!'
Noagonies can be too great to buy the right to say to this accuser,'We also have suffered.'
"It is not true that we have never been broken.
We have been brokenupon the wheel.
It is not true that we have never descended fromthese thrones.
We have descended into hell.
We were complaining ofunforgettable miseries even at the very moment when this manentered insolently to accuse us of happiness.
I repel the slander;we have not been happy.
I can answer for every one of the greatguards of Law whom he has accused.
At least--"He had turned his eyes so as to see suddenly the great face ofSunday, which wore a strange smile.
"Have you," he cried in a dreadful voice, "have you ever suffered?"
As he gazed, the great face grew to an awful size, grew larger thanthe colossal mask of Memnon, which had made him scream as a child.
It grew larger and larger, filling the whole sky; then everythingwent black.
Only in the blackness before it entirely destroyed hisbrain he seemed to hear a distant voice saying a commonplace textthat he had heard somewhere, "Can ye drink of the cup that I drinkof?"
*    *    *When men in books awake from a vision, they commonly findthemselves in some place in which they might have fallen asleep;they yawn in a chair, or lift themselves with bruised limbs from afield.
Syme's experience was something much more psychologicallystrange if there was indeed anything unreal, in the earthly sense,about the things he had gone through.
For while he could alwaysremember afterwards that he had swooned before the face of Sunday,he could not remember having ever come to at all.
He could onlyremember that gradually and naturally he knew that he was and hadbeen walking along a country lane with an easy and conversationalcompanion.
That companion had been a part of his recent drama; itwas the red-haired poet Gregory.
They were walking like oldfriends, and were in the middle of a conversation about sometriviality.
But Syme could only feel an unnatural buoyancy in hisbody and a crystal simplicity in his mind that seemed to besuperior to everything that he said or did.
He felt he was inpossession of some impossible good news, which made every otherthing a triviality, but an adorable triviality.
Dawn was breaking over everything in colours at once clear andtimid; as if Nature made a first attempt at yellow and a firstattempt at rose.
A breeze blew so clean and sweet, that one couldnot think that it blew from the sky; it blew rather through somehole in the sky.
Syme felt a simple surprise when he saw rising allround him on both sides of the road the red, irregular buildings ofSaffron Park.
He had no idea that he had walked so near London.
Hewalked by instinct along one white road, on which early birdshopped and sang, and found himself outside a fenced garden.
Therehe saw the sister of Gregory, the girl with the gold-red hair,cutting lilac before breakfast, with the great unconscious gravityof a girl.
