[The Tragedie of Julius Caesar by William Shakespeare 1599]Actus Primus.
Scoena Prima.
Enter Flauius, Murellus, and certaine Commoners ouer the Stage.
Flauius.
Hence: home you idle Creatures, get you home:Is this a Holiday?
What, know you not(Being Mechanicall) you ought not walkeVpon a labouring day, without the signeOf your Profession?
Speake, what Trade art thou?
Car.
Why Sir, a Carpenter   Mur.
Where is thy Leather Apron, and thy Rule?
What dost thou with thy best Apparrell on?
You sir, what Trade are you?
Cobl.
Truely Sir, in respect of a fine Workman, I ambut as you would say, a Cobler   Mur.
But what Trade art thou?
Answer me directly   Cob.
A Trade Sir, that I hope I may vse, with a safeConscience, which is indeed Sir, a Mender of bad soules   Fla. What Trade thou knaue?
Thou naughty knaue,what Trade?
Cobl.
Nay I beseech you Sir, be not out with me: yetif you be out Sir, I can mend you   Mur.
What mean'st thou by that?
Mend mee, thousawcy Fellow?
Cob.
Why sir, Cobble you   Fla. Thou art a Cobler, art thou?
Cob.
Truly sir, all that I liue by, is with the Aule: Imeddle with no Tradesmans matters, nor womens matters;but withal I am indeed Sir, a Surgeon to old shooes:when they are in great danger, I recouer them.
As propermen as euer trod vpon Neats Leather, haue gone vponmy handy-worke   Fla.
But wherefore art not in thy Shop to day?
Why do'st thou leade these men about the streets?
Cob.
Truly sir, to weare out their shooes, to get myselfe into more worke.
But indeede sir, we make Holydayto see Caesar, and to reioyce in his Triumph   Mur.
Wherefore reioyce?
What Conquest brings he home?
What Tributaries follow him to Rome,To grace in Captiue bonds his Chariot Wheeles?
You Blockes, you stones, you worse then senslesse things:O you hard hearts, you cruell men of Rome,Knew you not Pompey many a time and oft?
Haue you climb'd vp to Walles and Battlements,To Towres and Windowes?
Yea, to Chimney tops,Your Infants in your Armes, and there haue sateThe liue-long day, with patient expectation,To see great Pompey passe the streets of Rome:And when you saw his Chariot but appeare,Haue you not made an Vniuersall shout,That Tyber trembled vnderneath her bankesTo heare the replication of your sounds,Made in her Concaue Shores?
And do you now put on your best attyre?
And do you now cull out a Holyday?
And do you now strew Flowers in his way,That comes in Triumph ouer Pompeyes blood?
Be gone,Runne to your houses, fall vpon your knees,Pray to the Gods to intermit the plagueThat needs must light on this Ingratitude   Fla. Go, go, good Countrymen, and for this faultAssemble all the poore men of your sort;Draw them to Tyber bankes, and weepe your tearesInto the Channell, till the lowest streameDo kisse the most exalted Shores of all.
Exeunt.
all the Commoners.
See where their basest mettle be not mou'd,They vanish tongue-tyed in their guiltinesse:Go you downe that way towards the Capitoll,This way will I: Disrobe the Images,If you do finde them deckt with Ceremonies   Mur.
May we do so?
You know it is the Feast of Lupercall   Fla.
It is no matter, let no ImagesBe hung with Caesars Trophees: Ile about,And driue away the Vulgar from the streets;So do you too, where you perceiue them thicke.
These growing Feathers, pluckt from Caesars wing,Will make him flye an ordinary pitch,Who else would soare aboue the view of men,And keepe vs all in seruile fearefulnesse.
Exeunt.
Enter Caesar, Antony for the Course, Calphurnia, Portia, Decius,Cicero,Brutus, Cassius, Caska, a Soothsayer: after them Murellus andFlauius.
Caes.
Calphurnia   Cask.
Peace ho, Caesar speakes   Caes.
Calphurnia   Calp.
Heere my Lord   Caes.
Stand you directly in Antonio's way,When he doth run his course.
Antonio   Ant.
Cæsar, my Lord   Caes.
Forget not in your speed Antonio,To touch Calphurnia: for our Elders say,The Barren touched in this holy chace,Shake off their sterrile curse   Ant.
I shall remember,When Caesar sayes, Do this; it is perform'd   Caes.
Set on, and leaue no Ceremony out   Sooth.
Caesar   Caes.
Ha?
Who calles?
Cask.
Bid euery noyse be still: peace yet againe   Caes.
Who is it in the presse, that calles on me?
I heare a Tongue shriller then all the MusickeCry, Caesar: Speake, Caesar is turn'd to heare   Sooth.
Beware the Ides of March   Caes.
What man is that?
Br.
A Sooth-sayer bids you beware the Ides of March  Caes.
Set him before me, let me see his face   Cassi.
Fellow, come from the throng, look vpon Caesar   Caes.
What sayst thou to me now?
Speak once againe,  Sooth.
Beware the Ides of March   Caes.
He is a Dreamer, let vs leaue him: Passe.
SennetExeunt.
Manet Brut.
& Cass.
Cassi.
Will you go see the order of the course?
Brut.
Not I   Cassi.
I pray you do   Brut.
I am not Gamesom: I do lacke some partOf that quicke Spirit that is in Antony:Let me not hinder Cassius your desires;Ile leaue you   Cassi.
Brutus, I do obserue you now of late:I haue not from your eyes, that gentlenesseAnd shew of Loue, as I was wont to haue:You beare too stubborne, and too strange a handOuer your Friend, that loues you   Bru.
Cassius,Be not deceiu'd: If I haue veyl'd my looke,I turne the trouble of my CountenanceMeerely vpon my selfe.
Vexed I amOf late, with passions of some difference,Conceptions onely proper to my selfe,Which giue some soyle (perhaps) to my Behauiours:But let not therefore my good Friends be greeu'd(Among which number Cassius be you one)Nor construe any further my neglect,Then that poore Brutus with himselfe at warre,Forgets the shewes of Loue to other men   Cassi.
Then Brutus, I haue much mistook your passion,By meanes whereof, this Brest of mine hath buriedThoughts of great value, worthy Cogitations.
Tell me good Brutus, Can you see your face?
Brutus.
No Cassius:For the eye sees not it selfe but by reflection,By some other things   Cassius.
'Tis iust,And it is very much lamented Brutus,That you haue no such Mirrors, as will turneYour hidden worthinesse into your eye,That you might see your shadow:I haue heard,Where many of the best respect in Rome,(Except immortall Caesar) speaking of Brutus,And groaning vnderneath this Ages yoake,Haue wish'd, that Noble Brutus had his eyes   Bru.
Into what dangers, would youLeade me Cassius?
That you would haue me seeke into my selfe,For that which is not in me?
Cas.
Therefore good Brutus, be prepar'd to heare:And since you know, you cannot see your selfeSo well as by Reflection; I your Glasse,Will modestly discouer to your selfeThat of your selfe, which you yet know not of.
And be not iealous on me, gentle Brutus:Were I a common Laughter, or did vseTo stale with ordinary Oathes my loueTo euery new Protester: if you know,That I do fawne on men, and hugge them hard,And after scandall them: Or if you know,That I professe my selfe in BanquettingTo all the Rout, then hold me dangerous.
Flourish, and Shout.
Bru.
What meanes this Showting?
I do feare, the People choose CaesarFor their King   Cassi.
I, do you feare it?
Then must I thinke you would not haue it so   Bru.
I would not Cassius, yet I loue him well:But wherefore do you hold me heere so long?
What is it, that you would impart to me?
If it be ought toward the generall good,Set Honor in one eye, and Death i'th other,And I will looke on both indifferently:For let the Gods so speed mee, as I loueThe name of Honor, more then I feare death   Cassi.
I know that vertue to be in you Brutus,As well as I do know your outward fauour.
Well, Honor is the subiect of my Story:I cannot tell, what you and other menThinke of this life: But for my single selfe,I had as liefe not be, as liue to beIn awe of such a Thing, as I my selfe.
I was borne free as Caesar, so were you,We both haue fed as well, and we can bothEndure the Winters cold, as well as hee.
For once, vpon a Rawe and Gustie day,The troubled Tyber, chafing with her Shores,Caesar saide to me, Dar'st thou Cassius nowLeape in with me into this angry Flood,And swim to yonder Point?
Vpon the word,Accoutred as I was, I plunged in,And bad him follow: so indeed he did.
The Torrent roar'd, and we did buffet itWith lusty Sinewes, throwing it aside,And stemming it with hearts of Controuersie.
But ere we could arriue the Point propos'd,Caesar cride, Helpe me Cassius, or I sinke.
I (as Aeneas, our great Ancestor,Did from the Flames of Troy, vpon his shoulderThe old Anchyses beare) so, from the waues of TyberDid I the tyred Caesar: And this Man,Is now become a God, and Cassius isA wretched Creature, and must bend his body,If Caesar carelesly but nod on him.
He had a Feauer when he was in Spaine,And when the Fit was on him, I did markeHow he did shake: Tis true, this God did shake,His Coward lippes did from their colour flye,And that same Eye, whose bend doth awe the World,Did loose his Lustre: I did heare him grone:I, and that Tongue of his, that bad the RomansMarke him, and write his Speeches in their Bookes,Alas, it cried, Giue me some drinke Titinius,As a sicke Girle: Ye Gods, it doth amaze me,A man of such a feeble temper shouldSo get the start of the Maiesticke world,And beare the Palme alone.
Shout.
Flourish.
Bru.
Another generall shout?
I do beleeue, that these applauses areFor some new Honors, that are heap'd on Caesar   Cassi.
Why man, he doth bestride the narrow worldLike a Colossus, and we petty menWalke vnder his huge legges, and peepe aboutTo finde our selues dishonourable Graues.
Men at sometime, are Masters of their Fates.
The fault (deere Brutus) is not in our Starres,But in our Selues, that we are vnderlings.
Brutus and Caesar: What should be in that Caesar?
Why should that name be sounded more then yoursWrite them together: Yours, is as faire a Name:Sound them, it doth become the mouth aswell:Weigh them, it is as heauy: Coniure with 'em,Brutus will start a Spirit as soone as Caesar.
Now in the names of all the Gods at once,Vpon what meate doth this our Caesar feede,That he is growne so great?
Age, thou art sham'd.
Rome, thou hast lost the breed of Noble Bloods.
When went there by an Age, since the great Flood,But it was fam'd with more then with one man?
When could they say (till now) that talk'd of Rome,That her wide Walkes incompast but one man?
Now is it Rome indeed, and Roome enoughWhen there is in it but one onely man.
O!
you and I, haue heard our Fathers say,There was a Brutus once, that would haue brook'dTh' eternall Diuell to keepe his State in Rome,As easily as a King   Bru.
That you do loue me, I am nothing iealous:What you would worke me too, I haue some ayme:How I haue thought of this, and of these timesI shall recount heereafter.
For this present,I would not so (with loue I might intreat you)Be any further moou'd: What you haue said,I will consider: what you haue to sayI will with patience heare, and finde a timeBoth meete to heare, and answer such high things.
Till then, my Noble Friend, chew vpon this:Brutus had rather be a Villager,Then to repute himselfe a Sonne of RomeVnder these hard Conditions, as this timeIs like to lay vpon vs   Cassi.
I am glad that my weake wordsHaue strucke but thus much shew of fire from Brutus,Enter Caesar and his Traine.
Bru.
The Games are done,And Caesar is returning   Cassi.
As they passe by,Plucke Caska by the Sleeue,And he will (after his sowre fashion) tell youWhat hath proceeded worthy note to day   Bru.
I will do so: but looke you Cassius,The angry spot doth glow on Caesars brow,And all the rest, looke like a chidden Traine;Calphurnia's Cheeke is pale, and CiceroLookes with such Ferret, and such fiery eyesAs we haue seene him in the CapitollBeing crost in Conference, by some Senators   Cassi.
Caska will tell vs what the matter is   Caes Antonio   Ant.
Caesar   Caes Let me haue men about me, that are fat,Sleeke-headed men, and such as sleepe a-nights:Yond Cassius has a leane and hungry looke,He thinkes too much: such men are dangerous   Ant.
Feare him not Caesar, he's not dangerous,He is a Noble Roman, and well giuen   Caes Would he were fatter; But I feare him not:Yet if my name were lyable to feare,I do not know the man I should auoydSo soone as that spare Cassius.
He reades much,He is a great Obseruer, and he lookesQuite through the Deeds of men.
He loues no Playes,As thou dost Antony: he heares no Musicke;Seldome he smiles, and smiles in such a sortAs if he mock'd himselfe, and scorn'd his spiritThat could be mou'd to smile at any thing.
Such men as he, be neuer at hearts ease,Whiles they behold a greater then themselues,And therefore are they very dangerous.
I rather tell thee what is to be fear'd,Then what I feare: for alwayes I am Caesar.
Come on my right hand, for this eare is deafe,And tell me truely, what thou think'st of him.
Sennit.
Exeunt.
Caesar and his Traine.
Cask.
You pul'd me by the cloake, would you speakewith me?
Bru.
I Caska, tell vs what hath chanc'd to dayThat Caesar lookes so sad   Cask.
Why you were with him, were you not?
Bru.
I should not then aske Caska what had chanc'd   Cask.
Why there was a Crowne offer'd him; & beingoffer'd him, he put it by with the backe of his hand thus,and then the people fell a shouting   Bru.
What was the second noyse for?
Cask.
Why for that too   Cassi.
They shouted thrice: what was the last cry for?
Cask.
Why for that too   Bru.
Was the Crowne offer'd him thrice?
Cask.
I marry was't, and hee put it by thrice, euerietime gentler then other; and at euery putting by, minehonest Neighbors showted   Cassi.
Who offer'd him the Crowne?
Cask.
Why Antony   Bru.
Tell vs the manner of it, gentle Caska   Caska.
I can as well bee hang'd as tell the manner ofit: It was meere Foolerie, I did not marke it.
I saweMarke Antony offer him a Crowne, yet 'twas not aCrowne neyther, 'twas one of these Coronets: and as Itold you, hee put it by once: but for all that, to my thinking,he would faine haue had it.
Then hee offered it tohim againe: then hee put it by againe: but to my thinking,he was very loath to lay his fingers off it.
And thenhe offered it the third time; hee put it the third time by,and still as hee refus'd it, the rabblement howted, andclapp'd their chopt hands, and threw vppe their sweatieNight-cappes, and vttered such a deale of stinkingbreath, because Caesar refus'd the Crowne, that it had(almost) choaked Caesar: for hee swoonded, and felldowne at it: And for mine owne part, I durst not laugh,for feare of opening my Lippes, and receyuing the badAyre   Cassi.
But soft I pray you: what, did Caesar swound?
Cask.
He fell downe in the Market-place, and foam'dat mouth, and was speechlesse   Brut.
'Tis very like he hath the Falling sicknesse   Cassi.
No, Caesar hath it not: but you, and I,And honest Caska, we haue the Falling sicknesse   Cask.
I know not what you meane by that, but I amsure Caesar fell downe.
If the tag-ragge people did notclap him, and hisse him, according as he pleas'd, and displeas'dthem, as they vse to doe the Players in the Theatre,I am no true man   Brut.
What said he, when he came vnto himselfe?
Cask.
Marry, before he fell downe, when he perceiu'dthe common Heard was glad he refus'd the Crowne, hepluckt me ope his Doublet, and offer'd them his Throatto cut: and I had beene a man of any Occupation, if Iwould not haue taken him at a word, I would I mightgoe to Hell among the Rogues, and so hee fell.
Whenhe came to himselfe againe, hee said, If hee had done, orsaid any thing amisse, he desir'd their Worships to thinkeit was his infirmitie.
Three or foure Wenches where Istood, cryed, Alasse good Soule, and forgaue him withall their hearts: But there's no heed to be taken of them;if Caesar had stab'd their Mothers, they would haue doneno lesse   Brut.
And after that, he came thus sad away   Cask.
I   Cassi.
Did Cicero say any thing?
Cask.
I, he spoke Greeke   Cassi.
To what effect?
Cask.
Nay, and I tell you that, Ile ne're looke youi'th' face againe.
But those that vnderstood him, smil'dat one another, and shooke their heads: but for mineowne part, it was Greeke to me.
I could tell you morenewes too: Murrellus and Flauius, for pulling Scarffesoff Caesars Images, are put to silence.
Fare you well.
There was more Foolerie yet, if I could rememberit   Cassi.
Will you suppe with me to Night, Caska?
Cask.
No, I am promis'd forth   Cassi.
Will you Dine with me to morrow?
Cask.
I, if I be aliue, and your minde hold, and yourDinner worth the eating   Cassi.
Good, I will expect you   Cask.
Doe so: farewell both.
Enter.
Brut.
What a blunt fellow is this growne to be?
He was quick Mettle, when he went to Schoole   Cassi.
So is he now, in executionOf any bold, or Noble Enterprize,How-euer he puts on this tardie forme:This Rudenesse is a Sawce to his good Wit,Which giues men stomacke to disgest his wordsWith better Appetite   Brut.
And so it is:For this time I will leaue you:To morrow, if you please to speake with me,I will come home to you: or if you will,Come home to me, and I will wait for you   Cassi.
I will doe so: till then, thinke of the World.
Exit Brutus.
Well Brutus, thou art Noble: yet I see,Thy Honorable Mettle may be wroughtFrom that it is dispos'd: therefore it is meet,That Noble mindes keepe euer with their likes:For who so firme, that cannot be seduc'd?
Caesar doth beare me hard, but he loues Brutus.
If I were Brutus now, and he were Cassius,He should not humor me.
I will this Night,In seuerall Hands, in at his Windowes throw,As if they came from seuerall Citizens,Writings, all tending to the great opinionThat Rome holds of his Name: wherein obscurelyCaesars Ambition shall be glanced at.
And after this, let Caesar seat him sure,For wee will shake him, or worse dayes endure.
Enter.
Thunder, and Lightning.
Enter Caska, and Cicero.
Cic.
Good euen, Caska: brought you Caesar home?
Why are you breathlesse, and why stare you so?
Cask.
Are not you mou'd, when all the sway of EarthShakes, like a thing vnfirme?
O Cicero,I haue seene Tempests, when the scolding WindsHaue riu'd the knottie Oakes, and I haue seeneTh' ambitious Ocean swell, and rage, and foame,To be exalted with the threatning Clouds:But neuer till to Night, neuer till now,Did I goe through a Tempest-dropping-fire.
Eyther there is a Ciuill strife in Heauen,Or else the World, too sawcie with the Gods,Incenses them to send destruction   Cic.
Why, saw you any thing more wonderfull?
Cask.
A common slaue, you know him well by sight,Held vp his left Hand, which did flame and burneLike twentie Torches ioyn'd; and yet his Hand,Not sensible of fire, remain'd vnscorch'd.
Besides, I ha' not since put vp my Sword,Against the Capitoll I met a Lyon,Who glaz'd vpon me, and went surly by,Without annoying me.
And there were drawneVpon a heape, a hundred gastly Women,Transformed with their feare, who swore, they sawMen, all in fire, walke vp and downe the streetes.
And yesterday, the Bird of Night did sit,Euen at Noone-day, vpon the Market place,Howting, and shreeking.
When these ProdigiesDoe so conioyntly meet, let not men say,These are their Reasons, they are Naturall:For I beleeue, they are portentous thingsVnto the Clymate, that they point vpon   Cic.
Indeed, it is a strange disposed time:But men may construe things after their fashion,Cleane from the purpose of the things themselues.
Comes Caesar to the Capitoll to morrow?
Cask.
He doth: for he did bid AntonioSend word to you, he would be there to morrow   Cic.
Good-night then, Caska:This disturbed Skie is not to walke in   Cask.
Farewell Cicero.
Exit Cicero.
Enter Cassius.
Cassi.
Who's there?
Cask.
A Romane   Cassi.
Caska, by your Voyce   Cask.
Your Eare is good.
Cassius, what Night is this?
Cassi.
A very pleasing Night to honest men   Cask.
Who euer knew the Heauens menace so?
Cassi.
Those that haue knowne the Earth so full offaults.
For my part, I haue walk'd about the streets,Submitting me vnto the perillous Night;And thus vnbraced, Caska, as you see,Haue bar'd my Bosome to the Thunder-stone:And when the crosse blew Lightning seem'd to openThe Brest of Heauen, I did present my selfeEuen in the ayme, and very flash of it   Cask.
But wherefore did you so much tempt the Heauens?
It is the part of men, to feare and tremble,When the most mightie Gods, by tokens sendSuch dreadfull Heraulds, to astonish vs   Cassi.
You are dull, Caska:And those sparkes of Life, that should be in a Roman,You doe want, or else you vse not.
You looke pale, and gaze, and put on feare,And cast your selfe in wonder,To see the strange impatience of the Heauens:But if you would consider the true cause,Why all these Fires, why all these gliding Ghosts,Why Birds and Beasts, from qualitie and kinde,Why Old men, Fooles, and Children calculate,Why all these things change from their Ordinance,Their Natures, and pre-formed Faculties,To monstrous qualitie; why you shall finde,That Heauen hath infus'd them with these Spirits,To make them Instruments of feare, and warning,Vnto some monstrous State.
Now could I (Caska) name to thee a man,Most like this dreadfull Night,That Thunders, Lightens, opens Graues, and roares,As doth the Lyon in the Capitoll:A man no mightier then thy selfe, or me,In personall action; yet prodigious growne,And fearefull, as these strange eruptions are   Cask.
'Tis Caesar that you meane:Is it not, Cassius?
Cassi.
Let it be who it is: for Romans nowHaue Thewes, and Limbes, like to their Ancestors;But woe the while, our Fathers mindes are dead,And we are gouern'd with our Mothers spirits,Our yoake, and sufferance, shew vs Womanish   Cask.
Indeed, they say, the Senators to morrowMeane to establish Caesar as a King:And he shall weare his Crowne by Sea, and Land,In euery place, saue here in Italy   Cassi.
I know where I will weare this Dagger then;Cassius from Bondage will deliuer Cassius:Therein, yee Gods, you make the weake most strong;Therein, yee Gods, you Tyrants doe defeat.
Nor Stonie Tower, nor Walls of beaten Brasse,Nor ayre-lesse Dungeon, nor strong Linkes of Iron,Can be retentiue to the strength of spirit:But Life being wearie of these worldly Barres,Neuer lacks power to dismisse it selfe.
If I know this, know all the World besides,That part of Tyrannie that I doe beare,I can shake off at pleasure.
Thunder still.
Cask.
So can I:So euery Bond-man in his owne hand bearesThe power to cancell his Captiuitie   Cassi.
And why should Cæsar be a Tyrant then?
Poore man, I know he would not be a Wolfe,But that he sees the Romans are but Sheepe:He were no Lyon, were not Romans Hindes.
Those that with haste will make a mightie fire,Begin it with weake Strawes.
What trash is Rome?
What Rubbish, and what Offall?
when it seruesFor the base matter, to illuminateSo vile a thing as Caesar.
But oh Griefe,Where hast thou led me?
I (perhaps) speake thisBefore a willing Bond-man: then I knowMy answere must be made.
But I am arm'd,And dangers are to me indifferent   Cask.
You speake to Caska, and to such a man,That is no flearing Tell-tale.
Hold, my Hand:Be factious for redresse of all these Griefes,And I will set this foot of mine as farre,As who goes farthest   Cassi.
There's a Bargaine made.
Now know you, Caska, I haue mou'd alreadySome certaine of the Noblest minded RomansTo vnder-goe, with me, an Enterprize,Of Honorable dangerous consequence;And I doe know by this, they stay for meIn Pompeyes Porch: for now this fearefull Night,There is no stirre, or walking in the streetes;And the Complexion of the ElementIs Fauors, like the Worke we haue in hand,Most bloodie, fierie, and most terrible.
Enter Cinna.
Caska.
Stand close a while, for heere comes one inhaste   Cassi.
'Tis Cinna, I doe know him by his Gate,He is a friend.
Cinna, where haste you so?
Cinna.
To finde out you: Who's that, MetellusCymber?
Cassi.
No, it is Caska, one incorporateTo our Attempts.
Am I not stay'd for, Cinna?
Cinna.
I am glad on't.
What a fearefull Night is this?
There's two or three of vs haue seene strange sights   Cassi.
Am I not stay'd for?
tell me   Cinna.
Yes, you are.
O Cassius,If you could but winne the Noble BrutusTo our party-  Cassi.
Be you content.
Good Cinna, take this Paper,And looke you lay it in the Pretors Chayre,Where Brutus may but finde it: and throw thisIn at his Window; set this vp with WaxeVpon old Brutus Statue: all this done,Repaire to Pompeyes Porch, where you shall finde vs.Is Decius Brutus and Trebonius there?
Cinna.
All, but Metellus Cymber, and hee's goneTo seeke you at your house.
Well, I will hie,And so bestow these Papers as you bad me   Cassi.
That done, repayre to Pompeyes Theater.
Exit Cinna.
Come Caska, you and I will yet, ere day,See Brutus at his house: three parts of himIs ours alreadie, and the man entireVpon the next encounter, yeelds him ours   Cask.
O, he sits high in all the Peoples hearts:And that which would appeare Offence in vs,His Countenance, like richest Alchymie,Will change to Vertue, and to Worthinesse   Cassi.
Him, and his worth, and our great need of him,You haue right well conceited: let vs goe,For it is after Mid-night, and ere day,We will awake him, and be sure of him.
Exeunt.
Actus Secundus.
Enter Brutus in his Orchard.
Brut.
What Lucius, hoe?
I cannot, by the progresse of the Starres,Giue guesse how neere to day- Lucius, I say?
I would it were my fault to sleepe so soundly.
When Lucius, when?
awake, I say: what Lucius?
Enter Lucius.
Luc.
Call'd you, my Lord?
Brut.
Get me a Tapor in my Study, Lucius:When it is lighted, come and call me here   Luc.
I will, my Lord.
Enter.
Brut.
It must be by his death: and for my part,I know no personall cause, to spurne at him,But for the generall.
He would be crown'd:How that might change his nature, there's the question?
It is the bright day, that brings forth the Adder,And that craues warie walking: Crowne him that,And then I graunt we put a Sting in him,That at his will he may doe danger with.
Th' abuse of Greatnesse, is, when it dis-ioynesRemorse from Power: And to speake truth of Caesar,I haue not knowne, when his Affections sway'dMore then his Reason.
But 'tis a common proofe,That Lowlynesse is young Ambitions Ladder,Whereto the Climber vpward turnes his Face:But when he once attaines the vpmost Round,He then vnto the Ladder turnes his Backe,Lookes in the Clouds, scorning the base degreesBy which he did ascend: so Caesar may;Then least he may, preuent.
And since the QuarrellWill beare no colour, for the thing he is,Fashion it thus; that what he is, augmented,Would runne to these, and these extremities:And therefore thinke him as a Serpents egge,Which hatch'd, would as his kinde grow mischieuous;And kill him in the shell.
Enter Lucius.
Luc.
The Taper burneth in your Closet, Sir:Searching the Window for a Flint, I foundThis Paper, thus seal'd vp, and I am sureIt did not lye there when I went to Bed.
Giues him the Letter.
Brut.
Get you to Bed againe, it is not day:Is not to morrow (Boy) the first of March?
Luc.
I know not, Sir   Brut.
Looke in the Calender, and bring me word   Luc.
I will, Sir.
Enter.
Brut.
The exhalations, whizzing in the ayre,Giue so much light, that I may reade by them.
Opens the Letter, and reades.
Brutus thou sleep'st; awake, and see thy selfe:Shall Rome, &c. speake, strike, redresse.
Brutus, thou sleep'st: awake.
Such instigations haue beene often dropt,Where I haue tooke them vp:Shall Rome, &c. Thus must I piece it out:Shall Rome stand vnder one mans awe?
What Rome?
My Ancestors did from the streetes of RomeThe Tarquin driue, when he was call'd a King.
Speake, strike, redresse.
Am I entreatedTo speake, and strike?
O Rome, I make thee promise,If the redresse will follow, thou receiuestThy full Petition at the hand of Brutus.
Enter Lucius.
Luc.
Sir, March is wasted fifteene dayes.
Knocke within.
Brut.
'Tis good.
Go to the Gate, some body knocks:Since Cassius first did whet me against Caesar,I haue not slept.
Betweene the acting of a dreadfull thing,And the first motion, all the Interim isLike a Phantasma, or a hideous Dreame:The Genius, and the mortall InstrumentsAre then in councell; and the state of a man,Like to a little Kingdome, suffers thenThe nature of an Insurrection.
Enter Lucius.
Luc.
Sir, 'tis your Brother Cassius at the Doore,Who doth desire to see you   Brut.
Is he alone?
Luc.
No, Sir, there are moe with him   Brut.
Doe you know them?
Luc.
No, Sir, their Hats are pluckt about their Eares,And halfe their Faces buried in their Cloakes,That by no meanes I may discouer them,By any marke of fauour   Brut.
Let 'em enter:They are the Faction.
O Conspiracie,Sham'st thou to shew thy dang'rous Brow by Night,When euills are most free?
O then, by dayWhere wilt thou finde a Cauerne darke enough,To maske thy monstrous Visage?
Seek none Conspiracie,Hide it in Smiles, and Affabilitie:For if thou path thy natiue semblance on,Not Erebus it selfe were dimme enough,To hide thee from preuention.
Enter the Conspirators, Cassius, Caska, Decius, Cinna, Metellus,andTrebonius.
Cass.
I thinke we are too bold vpon your Rest:Good morrow Brutus, doe we trouble you?
Brut.
I haue beene vp this howre, awake all Night:Know I these men, that come along with you?
Cass.
Yes, euery man of them; and no man hereBut honors you: and euery one doth wish,You had but that opinion of your selfe,Which euery Noble Roman beares of you.
This is Trebonius   Brut.
He is welcome hither   Cass.
This, Decius Brutus   Brut.
He is welcome too   Cass.
This, Caska; this, Cinna; and this, MetellusCymber   Brut.
They are all welcome.
What watchfull Cares doe interpose themseluesBetwixt your Eyes, and Night?
Cass.
Shall I entreat a word?
They whisper.
Decius.
Here lyes the East: doth not the Day breakeheere?
Cask.
No   Cin.
O pardon, Sir, it doth; and yon grey Lines,That fret the Clouds, are Messengers of Day   Cask.
You shall confesse, that you are both deceiu'd:Heere, as I point my Sword, the Sunne arises,Which is a great way growing on the South,Weighing the youthfull Season of the yeare.
Some two moneths hence, vp higher toward the NorthHe first presents his fire, and the high EastStands as the Capitoll, directly heere   Bru.
Giue me your hands all ouer, one by one   Cas.
And let vs sweare our Resolution   Brut.
No, not an Oath: if not the Face of men,The sufferance of our Soules, the times Abuse;If these be Motiues weake, breake off betimes,And euery man hence, to his idle bed:So let high-sighted-Tyranny range on,Till each man drop by Lottery.
But if these(As I am sure they do) beare fire enoughTo kindle Cowards, and to steele with valourThe melting Spirits of women.
Then Countrymen,What neede we any spurre, but our owne causeTo pricke vs to redresse?
What other Bond,Then secret Romans, that haue spoke the word,And will not palter?
And what other Oath,Then Honesty to Honesty ingag'd,That this shall be, or we will fall for it.
Sweare Priests and Cowards, and men CautelousOld feeble Carrions, and such suffering SoulesThat welcome wrongs: Vnto bad causes, sweareSuch Creatures as men doubt; but do not staineThe euen vertue of our Enterprize,Nor th' insuppressiue Mettle of our Spirits,To thinke, that or our Cause, or our PerformanceDid neede an Oath.
When euery drop of bloodThat euery Roman beares, and Nobly bearesIs guilty of a seuerall Bastardie,If he do breake the smallest ParticleOf any promise that hath past from him   Cas.
But what of Cicero?
Shall we sound him?
I thinke he will stand very strong with vs   Cask.
Let vs not leaue him out   Cyn.
No, by no meanes   Metel.
O let vs haue him, for his Siluer hairesWill purchase vs a good opinion:And buy mens voyces, to commend our deeds:It shall be sayd, his iudgement rul'd our hands,Our youths, and wildenesse, shall no whit appeare,But all be buried in his Grauity   Bru.
O name him not; let vs not breake with him,For he will neuer follow any thingThat other men begin   Cas.
Then leaue him out   Cask.
Indeed, he is not fit   Decius.
Shall no man else be toucht, but onely Caesar?
Cas.
Decius well vrg'd: I thinke it is not meet,Marke Antony, so well belou'd of Caesar,Should out-liue Caesar, we shall finde of himA shrew'd Contriuer.
And you know, his meanesIf he improue them, may well stretch so farreAs to annoy vs all: which to preuent,Let Antony and Caesar fall together   Bru.
Our course will seeme too bloody, Caius Cassius,To cut the Head off, and then hacke the Limbes:Like Wrath in death, and Enuy afterwards:For Antony, is but a Limbe of Caesar.
Let's be Sacrificers, but not Butchers Caius:We all stand vp against the spirit of Caesar,And in the Spirit of men, there is no blood:O that we then could come by Caesars Spirit,And not dismember Caesar!
But (alas)Caesar must bleed for it.
And gentle Friends,Let's kill him Boldly, but not Wrathfully:Let's carue him, as a Dish fit for the Gods,Not hew him as a Carkasse fit for Hounds:And let our Hearts, as subtle Masters do,Stirre vp their Seruants to an acte of Rage,And after seeme to chide 'em.
This shall makeOur purpose Necessary, and not Enuious.
Which so appearing to the common eyes,We shall be call'd Purgers, not Murderers.
And for Marke Antony, thinke not of him:For he can do no more then Caesars Arme,When Caesars head is off   Cas.
Yet I feare him,For in the ingrafted loue he beares to Caesar   Bru.
Alas, good Cassius, do not thinke of him:If he loue Caesar, all that he can doIs to himselfe; take thought, and dye for Caesar,And that were much he should: for he is giuenTo sports, to wildenesse, and much company   Treb.
There is no feare in him; let him not dye,For he will liue, and laugh at this heereafter.
Clocke strikes.
Bru.
Peace, count the Clocke   Cas.
The Clocke hath stricken three   Treb.
'Tis time to part   Cass.
But it is doubtfull yet,Whether Caesar will come forth to day, or no:For he is Superstitious growne of late,Quite from the maine Opinion he held once,Of Fantasie, of Dreames, and Ceremonies:It may be, these apparant Prodigies,The vnaccustom'd Terror of this night,And the perswasion of his Augurers,May hold him from the Capitoll to day   Decius.
Neuer feare that: If he be so resolu'd,I can ore-sway him: For he loues to heare,That Vnicornes may be betray'd with Trees,And Beares with Glasses, Elephants with Holes,Lyons with Toyles, and men with Flatterers.
But, when I tell him, he hates Flatterers,He sayes, he does; being then most flattered.
Let me worke:For I can giue his humour the true bent;And I will bring him to the Capitoll   Cas.
Nay, we will all of vs, be there to fetch him   Bru.
By the eight houre, is that the vttermost?
Cin.
Be that the vttermost, and faile not then   Met.
Caius Ligarius doth beare Caesar hard,Who rated him for speaking well of Pompey;I wonder none of you haue thought of him   Bru.
Now good Metellus go along by him:He loues me well, and I haue giuen him Reasons,Send him but hither, and Ile fashion him   Cas.
The morning comes vpon's:Wee'l leaue you Brutus,And Friends disperse your selues; but all rememberWhat you haue said, and shew your selues true Romans   Bru.
Good Gentlemen, looke fresh and merrily,Let not our lookes put on our purposes,But beare it as our Roman Actors do,With vntyr'd Spirits, and formall Constancie,And so good morrow to you euery one.
Exeunt.
Manet Brutus.
Boy: Lucius: Fast asleepe?
It is no matter,Enioy the hony-heauy-Dew of Slumber:Thou hast no Figures, nor no Fantasies,Which busie care drawes, in the braines of men;Therefore thou sleep'st so sound.
Enter Portia.
Por.
Brutus, my Lord   Bru.
Portia: What meane you?
wherfore rise you now?
It is not for your health, thus to commitYour weake condition, to the raw cold morning   Por.
Nor for yours neither.
Y'haue vngently BrutusStole from my bed: and yesternight at SupperYou sodainly arose, and walk'd about,Musing, and sighing, with your armes acrosseAnd when I ask'd you what the matter was,You star'd vpon me, with vngentle lookes.
I vrg'd you further, then you scratch'd your head,And too impatiently stampt with your foote:Yet I insisted, yet you answer'd not,But with an angry wafter of your handGaue signe for me to leaue you: So I did,Fearing to strengthen that impatienceWhich seem'd too much inkindled; and withall,Hoping it was but an effect of Humor,Which sometime hath his houre with euery man.
It will not let you eate, nor talke, nor sleepe;And could it worke so much vpon your shape,As it hath much preuayl'd on your Condition,I should not know you Brutus.
Deare my Lord,Make me acquainted with your cause of greefe   Bru.
I am not well in health, and that is all   Por.
Brutus is wise, and were he not in health,He would embrace the meanes to come by it   Bru.
Why so I do: good Portia go to bed   Por.
Is Brutus sicke?
And is it PhysicallTo walke vnbraced, and sucke vp the humoursOf the danke Morning?
What, is Brutus sicke?
And will he steale out of his wholsome bedTo dare the vile contagion of the Night?
And tempt the Rhewmy, and vnpurged Ayre,To adde vnto his sicknesse?
No my Brutus,You haue some sicke Offence within your minde,Which by the Right and Vertue of my placeI ought to know of: And vpon my knees,I charme you, by my once commended Beauty,By all your vowes of Loue, and that great VowWhich did incorporate and make vs one,That you vnfold to me, your selfe; your halfeWhy you are heauy: and what men to nightHaue had resort to you: for heere haue beeneSome sixe or seuen, who did hide their facesEuen from darknesse   Bru.
Kneele not gentle Portia   Por.
I should not neede, if you were gentle Brutus.
Within the Bond of Marriage, tell me Brutus,Is it excepted, I should know no SecretsThat appertaine to you?
Am I your Selfe,But as it were in sort, or limitation?
To keepe with you at Meales, comfort your Bed,And talke to you sometimes?
Dwell I but in the SuburbsOf your good pleasure?
If it be no more,Portia is Brutus Harlot, not his Wife   Bru.
You are my true and honourable Wife,As deere to me, as are the ruddy droppesThat visit my sad heart   Por.
If this were true, then should I know this secret.
I graunt I am a Woman; but withall,A Woman that Lord Brutus tooke to Wife:I graunt I am a Woman; but withall,A Woman well reputed: Cato's Daughter.
Thinke you, I am no stronger then my SexBeing so Father'd, and so Husbanded?
Tell me your Counsels, I will not disclose 'em:I haue made strong proofe of my Constancie,Giuing my selfe a voluntary woundHeere, in the Thigh: Can I beare that with patience,And not my Husbands Secrets?
Bru.
O ye Gods!
Render me worthy of this Noble Wife.
Knocke.
Harke, harke, one knockes: Portia go in a while,And by and by thy bosome shall partakeThe secrets of my Heart.
All my engagements, I will construe to thee,All the Charractery of my sad browes:Leaue me with hast.
Exit Portia.
Enter Lucius and Ligarius.
Lucius, who's that knockes   Luc.
Heere is a sicke man that would speak with you   Bru.
Caius Ligarius, that Metellus spake of.
Boy, stand aside.
Caius Ligarius, how?
Cai.
Vouchsafe good morrow from a feeble tongue   Bru.
O what a time haue you chose out braue CaiusTo weare a Kerchiefe?
Would you were not sicke   Cai.
I am not sicke, if Brutus haue in handAny exploit worthy the name of Honor   Bru.
Such an exploit haue I in hand Ligarius,Had you a healthfull eare to heare of it   Cai.
By all the Gods that Romans bow before,I heere discard my sicknesse.
Soule of Rome,Braue Sonne, deriu'd from Honourable Loines,Thou like an Exorcist, hast coniur'd vpMy mortified Spirit.
Now bid me runne,And I will striue with things impossible,Yea get the better of them.
What's to do?
Bru.
A peece of worke,That will make sicke men whole   Cai.
But are not some whole, that we must make sicke?
Bru.
That must we also.
What it is my Caius,I shall vnfold to thee, as we are going,To whom it must be done   Cai.
Set on your foote,And with a heart new-fir'd, I follow you,To do I know not what: but it sufficethThat Brutus leads me on.
Thunder  Bru.
Follow me then.
Exeunt.
Thunder & LightningEnter Iulius Caesar in his Night-gowne.
Caesar.
Nor Heauen, nor Earth,Haue beene at peace to night:Thrice hath Calphurnia, in her sleepe cryed out,Helpe, ho: They murther Caesar.
Who's within?
Enter a Seruant.
Ser.
My Lord   Caes Go bid the Priests do present Sacrifice,And bring me their opinions of Successe   Ser.
I will my Lord.
ExitEnter Calphurnia.
Cal.
What mean you Caesar?
Think you to walk forth?
You shall not stirre out of your house to day   Caes Caesar shall forth; the things that threaten'd me,Ne're look'd but on my backe: When they shall seeThe face of Caesar, they are vanished   Calp.
Caesar, I neuer stood on Ceremonies,Yet now they fright me: There is one within,Besides the things that we haue heard and seene,Recounts most horrid sights seene by the Watch.
A Lionnesse hath whelped in the streets,And Graues haue yawn'd, and yeelded vp their dead;Fierce fiery Warriours fight vpon the CloudsIn Rankes and Squadrons, and right forme of WarreWhich drizel'd blood vpon the Capitoll:The noise of Battell hurtled in the Ayre:Horsses do neigh, and dying men did grone,And Ghosts did shrieke and squeale about the streets.
O Caesar, these things are beyond all vse,And I do feare them   Caes What can be auoydedWhose end is purpos'd by the mighty Gods?
Yet Caesar shall go forth: for these PredictionsAre to the world in generall, as to Caesar   Calp.
When Beggers dye, there are no Comets seen,The Heauens themselues blaze forth the death of Princes  Caes Cowards dye many times before their deaths,The valiant neuer taste of death but once:Of all the Wonders that I yet haue heard,It seemes to me most strange that men should feare,Seeing that death, a necessary endWill come, when it will come.
Enter a Seruant.
What say the Augurers?
Ser.
They would not haue you to stirre forth to day.
Plucking the intrailes of an Offering forth,They could not finde a heart within the beast   Caes The Gods do this in shame of Cowardice:Caesar should be a Beast without a heartIf he should stay at home to day for feare:No Caesar shall not; Danger knowes full wellThat Caesar is more dangerous then he.
We heare two Lyons litter'd in one day,And I the elder and more terrible,And Caesar shall go foorth   Calp.
Alas my Lord,Your wisedome is consum'd in confidence:Do not go forth to day: Call it my feare,That keepes you in the house, and not your owne.
Wee'l send Mark Antony to the Senate house,And he shall say, you are not well to day:Let me vpon my knee, preuaile in this   Caes Mark Antony shall say I am not well,And for thy humor, I will stay at home.
Enter Decius.
Heere's Decius Brutus, he shall tell them so   Deci.
Caesar, all haile: Good morrow worthy Caesar,I come to fetch you to the Senate house   Caes And you are come in very happy time,To beare my greeting to the Senators,And tell them that I will not come to day:Cannot, is false: and that I dare not, falser:I will not come to day, tell them so Decius   Calp.
Say he is sicke   Caes Shall Caesar send a Lye?
Haue I in Conquest stretcht mine Arme so farre,To be afear'd to tell Gray-beards the truth:Decius, go tell them, Caesar will not come   Deci.
Most mighty Caesar, let me know some cause,Lest I be laught at when I tell them so   Caes The cause is in my Will, I will not come,That is enough to satisfie the Senate.
But for your priuate satisfaction,Because I loue you, I will let you know.
Calphurnia heere my wife, stayes me at home:She dreampt to night, she saw my Statue,Which like a Fountaine, with an hundred spoutsDid run pure blood: and many lusty RomansCame smiling, & did bathe their hands in it:And these does she apply, for warnings and portents,And euils imminent; and on her kneeHath begg'd, that I will stay at home to day   Deci.
This Dreame is all amisse interpreted,It was a vision, faire and fortunate:Your Statue spouting blood in many pipes,In which so many smiling Romans bath'd,Signifies, that from you great Rome shall suckeReuiuing blood, and that great men shall presseFor Tinctures, Staines, Reliques, and Cognisance.
This by Calphurnia's Dreame is signified   Caes And this way haue you well expounded it   Deci.
I haue, when you haue heard what I can say:And know it now, the Senate haue concludedTo giue this day, a Crowne to mighty Caesar.
If you shall send them word you will not come,Their mindes may change.
Besides, it were a mockeApt to be render'd, for some one to say,Breake vp the Senate, till another time:When Caesars wife shall meete with better Dreames.
If Caesar hide himselfe, shall they not whisperLoe Caesar is affraid?
Pardon me Caesar, for my deere deere loueTo your proceeding, bids me tell you this:And reason to my loue is liable   Caes How foolish do your fears seeme now Calphurnia?
I am ashamed I did yeeld to them.
Giue me my Robe, for I will go.
Enter Brutus, Ligarius, Metellus, Caska, Trebonius, Cynna, andPublius.
And looke where Publius is come to fetch me   Pub.
Good morrow Caesar   Caes Welcome Publius.
What Brutus, are you stirr'd so earely too?
Good morrow Caska: Caius Ligarius,Caesar was ne're so much your enemy,As that same Ague which hath made you leane.
What is't a Clocke?
Bru.
Caesar, 'tis strucken eight   Caes I thanke you for your paines and curtesie.
Enter Antony.
See, Antony that Reuels long a-nightsIs notwithstanding vp.
Good morrow Antony   Ant.
So to most Noble Caesar   Caes Bid them prepare within:I am too blame to be thus waited for.
Now Cynna, now Metellus: what Trebonius,I haue an houres talke in store for you:Remember that you call on me to day:Be neere me, that I may remember you   Treb.
Caesar I will: and so neere will I be,That your best Friends shall wish I had beene further   Caes Good Friends go in, and taste some wine with me.
And we (like Friends) will straight way go together   Bru.
That euery like is not the same, O Caesar,The heart of Brutus earnes to thinke vpon.
Exeunt.
Enter Artemidorus.
Caesar, beware of Brutus, take heede of Cassius; come notneere Caska, haue an eye to Cynna, trust not Trebonius, markewell Metellus Cymber, Decius Brutus loues thee not: Thouhast wrong'd Caius Ligarius.
There is but one minde in allthese men, and it is bent against Caesar: If thou beest notImmortall,looke about you: Security giues way to Conspiracie.
The mighty Gods defend thee.
Thy Louer, Artemidorus.
Heere will I stand, till Caesar passe along,And as a Sutor will I giue him this:My heart laments, that Vertue cannot liueOut of the teeth of Emulation.
If thou reade this, O Caesar, thou mayest liue;If not, the Fates with Traitors do contriue.
Enter.
Enter Portia and Lucius.
Por.
I prythee Boy, run to the Senate-house,Stay not to answer me, but get thee gone.
Why doest thou stay?
Luc.
To know my errand Madam   Por.
I would haue had thee there and heere agenEre I can tell thee what thou should'st do there:O Constancie, be strong vpon my side,Set a huge Mountaine 'tweene my Heart and Tongue:I haue a mans minde, but a womans might:How hard it is for women to keepe counsell.
Art thou heere yet?
Luc.
Madam, what should I do?
Run to the Capitoll, and nothing else?
And so returne to you, and nothing else?
Por.
Yes, bring me word Boy, if thy Lord look well,For he went sickly forth: and take good noteWhat Caesar doth, what Sutors presse to him.
Hearke Boy, what noyse is that?
Luc.
I heare none Madam   Por.
Prythee listen well:I heard a bussling Rumor like a Fray,And the winde brings it from the Capitoll   Luc.
Sooth Madam, I heare nothing.
Enter the Soothsayer.
Por.
Come hither Fellow, which way hast thou bin?
Sooth.
At mine owne house, good Lady   Por.
What is't a clocke?
Sooth.
About the ninth houre Lady   Por.
Is Caesar yet gone to the Capitoll?
Sooth.
Madam not yet, I go to take my stand,To see him passe on to the Capitoll   Por.
Thou hast some suite to Caesar, hast thou not?
Sooth.
That I haue Lady, if it will please CaesarTo be so good to Caesar, as to heare me:I shall beseech him to befriend himselfe   Por.
Why know'st thou any harme's intended towardshim?
Sooth.
None that I know will be,Much that I feare may chance:Good morrow to you: heere the street is narrow:The throng that followes Caesar at the heeles,Of Senators, of Praetors, common Sutors,Will crowd a feeble man (almost) to death:Ile get me to a place more voyd, and thereSpeake to great Caesar as he comes along.
Exit  Por.
I must go in:Aye me!
How weake a thingThe heart of woman is?
O Brutus,The Heauens speede thee in thine enterprize.
Sure the Boy heard me: Brutus hath a suiteThat Caesar will not grant.
O, I grow faint:Run Lucius, and commend me to my Lord,Say I am merry; Come to me againe,And bring me word what he doth say to thee.
Exeunt.
Actus Tertius.
FlourishEnter Caesar, Brutus, Cassius, Caska, Decius, Metellus, Trebonius,Cynna,Antony, Lepidus, Artimedorus, Publius, and the Soothsayer.
Caes The Ides of March are come   Sooth.
I Caesar, but not gone   Art.
Haile Caesar: Read this Scedule   Deci.
Trebonius doth desire you to ore-read(At your best leysure) this his humble suite   Art.
O Caesar, reade mine first: for mine's a suiteThat touches Caesar neerer.
Read it great Caesar   Caes What touches vs our selfe, shall be last seru'd   Art.
Delay not Caesar, read it instantly   Caes What, is the fellow mad?
Pub.
Sirra, giue place   Cassi.
What, vrge you your Petitions in the street?
Come to the Capitoll   Popil.
I wish your enterprize to day may thriue   Cassi.
What enterprize Popillius?
Popil.
Fare you well   Bru.
What said Popillius Lena?
Cassi.
He wisht to day our enterprize might thriue:I feare our purpose is discouered   Bru.
Looke how he makes to Caesar: marke him   Cassi.
Caska be sodaine, for we feare preuention.
Brutus what shall be done?
If this be knowne,Cassius or Caesar neuer shall turne backe,For I will slay my selfe   Bru.
Cassius be constant:Popillius Lena speakes not of our purposes,For looke he smiles, and Caesar doth not change   Cassi.
Trebonius knowes his time: for look you BrutusHe drawes Mark Antony out of the way   Deci.
Where is Metellus Cimber, let him go,And presently preferre his suite to Caesar   Bru.
He is addrest: presse neere, and second him   Cin.
Caska, you are the first that reares your hand   Caes Are we all ready?
What is now amisse,That Caesar and his Senate must redresse?
Metel.
Most high, most mighty, and most puisant CaesarMetellus Cymber throwes before thy SeateAn humble heart   Caes I must preuent thee Cymber:These couchings, and these lowly courtesiesMight fire the blood of ordinary men,And turne pre-Ordinance, and first DecreeInto the lane of Children.
Be not fond,To thinke that Caesar beares such Rebell bloodThat will be thaw'd from the true qualityWith that which melteth Fooles, I meane sweet words,Low-crooked-curtsies, and base Spaniell fawning:Thy Brother by decree is banished:If thou doest bend, and pray, and fawne for him,I spurne thee like a Curre out of my way:Know, Caesar doth not wrong, nor without causeWill he be satisfied   Metel.
Is there no voyce more worthy then my owne,To sound more sweetly in great Caesars eare,For the repealing of my banish'd Brother?
Bru.
I kisse thy hand, but not in flattery Caesar:Desiring thee, that Publius Cymber mayHaue an immediate freedome of repeale   Caes What Brutus?
Cassi.
Pardon Caesar: Caesar pardon:As lowe as to thy foote doth Cassius fall,To begge infranchisement for Publius Cymber   Caes I could be well mou'd, if I were as you,If I could pray to mooue, Prayers would mooue me:But I am constant as the Northerne Starre,Of whose true fixt, and resting quality,There is no fellow in the Firmament.
The Skies are painted with vnnumbred sparkes,They are all Fire, and euery one doth shine:But, there's but one in all doth hold his place.
So, in the World; 'Tis furnish'd well with Men,And Men are Flesh and Blood, and apprehensiue;Yet in the number, I do know but OneThat vnassayleable holds on his Ranke,Vnshak'd of Motion: and that I am he,Let me a little shew it, euen in this:That I was constant Cymber should be banish'd,And constant do remaine to keepe him so   Cinna.
O Caesar   Caes Hence: Wilt thou lift vp Olympus?
Decius.
Great Caesar   Caes Doth not Brutus bootlesse kneele?
Cask.
Speake hands for me.
They stab Caesar.
Caes Et Tu Brute?
- Then fall Caesar.
Dyes  Cin.
Liberty, Freedome; Tyranny is dead,Run hence, proclaime, cry it about the Streets   Cassi.
Some to the common Pulpits, and cry outLiberty, Freedome, and Enfranchisement   Bru.
People and Senators, be not affrighted:Fly not, stand still: Ambitions debt is paid   Cask.
Go to the Pulpit Brutus   Dec. And Cassius too   Bru.
Where's Publius?
Cin.
Heere, quite confounded with this mutiny   Met.
Stand fast together, least some Friend of CaesarsShould chance-  Bru.
Talke not of standing.
Publius good cheere,There is no harme intended to your person,Nor to no Roman else: so tell them Publius   Cassi.
And leaue vs Publius, least that the peopleRushing on vs, should do your Age some mischiefe   Bru.
Do so, and let no man abide this deede,But we the Doers.
Enter Trebonius   Cassi.
Where is Antony?
Treb.
Fled to his House amaz'd:Men, Wiues, and Children, stare, cry out, and run,As it were Doomesday   Bru.
Fates, we will know your pleasures:That we shall dye we know, 'tis but the timeAnd drawing dayes out, that men stand vpon   Cask.
Why he that cuts off twenty yeares of life,Cuts off so many yeares of fearing death   Bru.
Grant that, and then is Death a Benefit:So are we Caesars Friends, that haue abridg'dHis time of fearing death.
Stoope Romans, stoope,And let vs bathe our hands in Caesars bloodVp to the Elbowes, and besmeare our Swords:Then walke we forth, euen to the Market place,And wauing our red Weapons o're our heads,Let's all cry Peace, Freedome, and Liberty   Cassi.
Stoop then, and wash. How many Ages henceShall this our lofty Scene be acted ouer,In State vnborne, and Accents yet vnknowne?
Bru.
How many times shall Caesar bleed in sport,That now on Pompeyes Basis lye along,No worthier then the dust?
Cassi.
So oft as that shall be,So often shall the knot of vs be call'd,The Men that gaue their Country liberty   Dec. What, shall we forth?
Cassi.
I, euery man away.
Brutus shall leade, and we will grace his heelesWith the most boldest, and best hearts of Rome.
Enter a Seruant.
Bru.
Soft, who comes heere?
A friend of Antonies   Ser.
Thus Brutus did my Master bid me kneele;Thus did Mark Antony bid me fall downe,And being prostrate, thus he bad me say:Brutus is Noble, Wise, Valiant, and Honest;Caesar was Mighty, Bold, Royall, and Louing:Say, I loue Brutus, and I honour him;Say, I fear'd Caesar, honour'd him, and lou'd him.
If Brutus will vouchsafe, that AntonyMay safely come to him, and be resolu'dHow Caesar hath deseru'd to lye in death,Mark Antony, shall not loue Caesar deadSo well as Brutus liuing; but will followThe Fortunes and Affayres of Noble Brutus,Thorough the hazards of this vntrod State,With all true Faith.
So sayes my Master Antony   Bru.
Thy Master is a Wise and Valiant Romane,I neuer thought him worse:Tell him, so please him come vnto this placeHe shall be satisfied: and by my HonorDepart vntouch'd   Ser.
Ile fetch him presently.
Exit Seruant.
Bru.
I know that we shall haue him well to Friend   Cassi.
I wish we may: But yet haue I a mindeThat feares him much: and my misgiuing stillFalles shrewdly to the purpose.
Enter Antony.
Bru.
But heere comes Antony:Welcome Mark Antony   Ant.
O mighty Caesar!
Dost thou lye so lowe?
Are all thy Conquests, Glories, Triumphes, Spoiles,Shrunke to this little Measure?
Fare thee well.
I know not Gentlemen what you intend,Who else must be let blood, who else is ranke:If I my selfe, there is no houre so fitAs Caesars deaths houre; nor no InstrumentOf halfe that worth, as those your Swords; made richWith the most Noble blood of all this World.
I do beseech yee, if you beare me hard,Now, whil'st your purpled hands do reeke and smoake,Fulfill your pleasure.
Liue a thousand yeeres,I shall not finde my selfe so apt to dye.
No place will please me so, no meane of death,As heere by Caesar, and by you cut off,The Choice and Master Spirits of this Age   Bru.
O Antony!
Begge not your death of vs:Though now we must appeare bloody and cruell,As by our hands, and this our present ActeYou see we do: Yet see you but our hands,And this, the bleeding businesse they haue done:Our hearts you see not, they are pittifull:And pitty to the generall wrong of Rome,As fire driues out fire, so pitty, pittyHath done this deed on Caesar.
For your part,To you, our Swords haue leaden points Marke Antony:Our Armes in strength of malice, and our HeartsOf Brothers temper, do receiue you in,With all kinde loue, good thoughts, and reuerence   Cassi.
Your voyce shall be as strong as any mans,In the disposing of new Dignities   Bru.
Onely be patient, till we haue appeas'dThe Multitude, beside themselues with feare,And then, we will deliuer you the cause,Why I, that did loue Caesar when I strooke him,Haue thus proceeded   Ant.
I doubt not of your Wisedome:Let each man render me his bloody hand.
First Marcus Brutus will I shake with you;Next Caius Cassius do I take your hand;Now Decius Brutus yours; now yours Metellus;Yours Cinna; and my valiant Caska, yours;Though last, not least in loue, yours good Trebonius.
Gentlemen all: Alas, what shall I say,My credit now stands on such slippery ground,That one of two bad wayes you must conceit me,Either a Coward, or a Flatterer.
That I did loue thee Caesar, O 'tis true:If then thy Spirit looke vpon vs now,Shall it not greeue thee deerer then thy death,To see thy Antony making his peace,Shaking the bloody fingers of thy Foes?
Most Noble, in the presence of thy Coarse,Had I as many eyes, as thou hast wounds,Weeping as fast as they streame forth thy blood,It would become me better, then to closeIn tearmes of Friendship with thine enemies.
Pardon me Iulius, heere was't thou bay'd braue Hart,Heere did'st thou fall, and heere thy Hunters standSign'd in thy Spoyle, and Crimson'd in thy Lethee.
O World!
thou wast the Forrest to this Hart,And this indeed, O World, the Hart of thee.
How like a Deere, stroken by many Princes,Dost thou heere lye?
Cassi.
Mark Antony   Ant.
Pardon me Caius Cassius:The Enemies of Caesar, shall say this:Then, in a Friend, it is cold Modestie   Cassi.
I blame you not for praising Caesar so.
But what compact meane you to haue with vs?
Will you be prick'd in number of our Friends,Or shall we on, and not depend on you?
Ant.
Therefore I tooke your hands, but was indeedSway'd from the point, by looking downe on Caesar.
Friends am I with you all, and loue you all,Vpon this hope, that you shall giue me Reasons,Why, and wherein, Caesar was dangerous   Bru.
Or else were this a sauage Spectacle:Our Reasons are so full of good regard,That were you Antony, the Sonne of Caesar,You should be satisfied   Ant.
That's all I seeke,And am moreouer sutor, that I mayProduce his body to the Market-place,And in the Pulpit as becomes a Friend,Speake in the Order of his Funerall   Bru.
You shall Marke Antony   Cassi.
Brutus, a word with you:You know not what you do; Do not consentThat Antony speake in his Funerall:Know you how much the people may be mou'dBy that which he will vtter   Bru.
By your pardon:I will my selfe into the Pulpit first,And shew the reason of our Caesars death.
What Antony shall speake, I will protestHe speakes by leaue, and by permission:And that we are contented Caesar shallHaue all true Rites, and lawfull Ceremonies,It shall aduantage more, then do vs wrong   Cassi.
I know not what may fall, I like it not   Bru.
Mark Antony, heere take you Caesars body:You shall not in your Funerall speech blame vs,But speake all good you can deuise of Caesar,And say you doo't by our permission:Else shall you not haue any hand at allAbout his Funerall.
And you shall speakeIn the same Pulpit whereto I am going,After my speech is ended   Ant.
Be it so:I do desire no more   Bru.
Prepare the body then, and follow vs.Exeunt.
Manet Antony.
O pardon me, thou bleeding peece of Earth:That I am meeke and gentle with these Butchers.
Thou art the Ruines of the Noblest manThat euer liued in the Tide of Times.
Woe to the hand that shed this costly Blood.
Ouer thy wounds, now do I Prophesie,(Which like dumbe mouthes do ope their Ruby lips,To begge the voyce and vtterance of my Tongue)A Curse shall light vpon the limbes of men;Domesticke Fury, and fierce Ciuill strife,Shall cumber all the parts of Italy:Blood and destruction shall be so in vse,And dreadfull Obiects so familiar,That Mothers shall but smile, when they beholdTheir Infants quartered with the hands of Warre:All pitty choak'd with custome of fell deeds,And Caesars Spirit ranging for Reuenge,With Ate by his side, come hot from Hell,Shall in these Confines, with a Monarkes voyce,Cry hauocke, and let slip the Dogges of Warre,That this foule deede, shall smell aboue the earthWith Carrion men, groaning for Buriall.
Enter Octauio's Seruant.
You serue Octauius Caesar, do you not?
Ser.
I do Marke Antony   Ant.
Caesar did write for him to come to Rome   Ser.
He did receiue his Letters, and is comming,And bid me say to you by word of mouth-O Caesar!
Ant.
Thy heart is bigge: get thee a-part and weepe:Passion I see is catching from mine eyes,Seeing those Beads of sorrow stand in thine,Began to water.
Is thy Master comming?
Ser.
He lies to night within seuen Leagues of Rome   Ant.
Post backe with speede,And tell him what hath chanc'd:Heere is a mourning Rome, a dangerous Rome,No Rome of safety for Octauius yet,Hie hence, and tell him so.
Yet stay a-while,Thou shalt not backe, till I haue borne this courseInto the Market place: There shall I tryIn my Oration, how the People takeThe cruell issue of these bloody men,According to the which, thou shalt discourseTo yong Octauius, of the state of things.
Lend me your hand.
Exeunt.
Enter Brutus and goes into the Pulpit, and Cassius, with thePlebeians.
Ple.
We will be satisfied: let vs be satisfied   Bru.
Then follow me, and giue me Audience friends.
Cassius go you into the other streete,And part the Numbers:Those that will heare me speake, let 'em stay heere;Those that will follow Cassius, go with him,And publike Reasons shall be rendredOf Caesars death   1.Ple.
I will heare Brutus speake   2.
I will heare Cassius, and compare their Reasons,When seuerally we heare them rendred   3.
The Noble Brutus is ascended: Silence   Bru.
Be patient till the last.
Romans, Countrey-men, and Louers, heare mee for mycause, and be silent, that you may heare.
Beleeue me formine Honor, and haue respect to mine Honor, that youmay beleeue.
Censure me in your Wisedom, and awakeyour Senses, that you may the better Iudge.
If there beeany in this Assembly, any deere Friend of Caesars, to himI say, that Brutus loue to Caesar, was no lesse then his.
Ifthen, that Friend demand, why Brutus rose against Caesar,this is my answer: Not that I lou'd Caesar lesse, butthat I lou'd Rome more.
Had you rather Caesar were liuing,and dye all Slaues; then that Caesar were dead, toliue all Free-men?
As Caesar lou'd mee, I weepe for him;as he was Fortunate, I reioyce at it; as he was Valiant, Ihonour him: But, as he was Ambitious, I slew him.
Thereis Teares, for his Loue: Ioy, for his Fortune: Honor, forhis Valour: and Death, for his Ambition.
Who is heereso base, that would be a Bondman?
If any, speak, for himhaue I offended.
Who is heere so rude, that would notbe a Roman?
If any, speak, for him haue I offended.
Whois heere so vile, that will not loue his Countrey?
If any,speake, for him haue I offended.
I pause for a Reply   All.
None Brutus, none   Brutus.
Then none haue I offended.
I haue done nomore to Caesar, then you shall do to Brutus.
The Questionof his death, is inroll'd in the Capitoll: his Glory notextenuated, wherein he was worthy; nor his offences enforc'd,for which he suffered death.
Enter Mark Antony, with Caesars body.
Heere comes his Body, mourn'd by Marke Antony, whothough he had no hand in his death, shall receiue the benefitof his dying, a place in the Co[m]monwealth, as whichof you shall not.
With this I depart, that as I slewe mybest Louer for the good of Rome, I haue the same Daggerfor my selfe, when it shall please my Country to needmy death   All.
Liue Brutus, liue, liue   1.
Bring him with Triumph home vnto his house   2.
Giue him a Statue with his Ancestors   3.
Let him be Caesar   4.
Caesars better parts,Shall be Crown'd in Brutus   1.
Wee'l bring him to his House,With Showts and Clamors   Bru.
My Country-men   2.
Peace, silence, Brutus speakes   1.
Peace ho   Bru.
Good Countrymen, let me depart alone,And (for my sake) stay heere with Antony:Do grace to Caesars Corpes, and grace his SpeechTending to Caesars Glories, which Marke Antony(By our permission) is allow'd to make.
I do intreat you, not a man depart,Saue I alone, till Antony haue spoke.
Exit  1 Stay ho, and let vs heare Mark Antony   3 Let him go vp into the publike Chaire,Wee'l heare him: Noble Antony go vp   Ant.
For Brutus sake, I am beholding to you   4 What does he say of Brutus?
3 He sayes, for Brutus sakeHe findes himselfe beholding to vs all   4 'Twere best he speake no harme of Brutus heere?
1 This Caesar was a Tyrant   3 Nay that's certaine:We are blest that Rome is rid of him   2 Peace, let vs heare what Antony can say   Ant.
You gentle Romans   All.
Peace hoe, let vs heare him   An.
Friends, Romans, Countrymen, lend me your ears:I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him:The euill that men do, liues after them,The good is oft enterred with their bones,So let it be with Caesar.
The Noble Brutus,Hath told you Caesar was Ambitious:If it were so, it was a greeuous Fault,And greeuously hath Caesar answer'd it.
Heere, vnder leaue of Brutus, and the rest(For Brutus is an Honourable man,So are they all; all Honourable men)Come I to speake in Caesars Funerall.
He was my Friend, faithfull, and iust to me;But Brutus sayes, he was Ambitious,And Brutus is an Honourable man.
He hath brought many Captiues home to Rome,Whose Ransomes, did the generall Coffers fill:Did this in Caesar seeme Ambitious?
When that the poore haue cry'de, Caesar hath wept:Ambition should be made of sterner stuffe,Yet Brutus sayes, he was Ambitious:And Brutus is an Honourable man.
You all did see, that on the Lupercall,I thrice presented him a Kingly Crowne,Which he did thrice refuse.
Was this Ambition?
Yet Brutus sayes, he was Ambitious:And sure he is an Honourable man.
I speake not to disprooue what Brutus spoke,But heere I am, to speake what I do know;You all did loue him once, not without cause,What cause with-holds you then, to mourne for him?
O Iudgement!
thou are fled to brutish Beasts,And Men haue lost their Reason.
Beare with me,My heart is in the Coffin there with Caesar,And I must pawse, till it come backe to me   1 Me thinkes there is much reason in his sayings   2 If thou consider rightly of the matter,Caesar ha's had great wrong   3 Ha's hee Masters?
I feare there will a worse come in his place   4.
Mark'd ye his words?
he would not take y Crown,Therefore 'tis certaine, he was not Ambitious   1.
If it be found so, some will deere abide it   2.
Poore soule, his eyes are red as fire with weeping   3.
There's not a Nobler man in Rome then Antony   4.
Now marke him, he begins againe to speake   Ant.
But yesterday, the word of Caesar mightHaue stood against the World: Now lies he there,And none so poore to do him reuerence.
O Maisters!
If I were dispos'd to stirreYour hearts and mindes to Mutiny and Rage,I should do Brutus wrong, and Cassius wrong:Who (you all know) are Honourable men.
I will not do them wrong: I rather chooseTo wrong the dead, to wrong my selfe and you,Then I will wrong such Honourable men.
But heere's a Parchment, with the Seale of Caesar,I found it in his Closset, 'tis his Will:Let but the Commons heare this Testament:(Which pardon me) I do not meane to reade,And they would go and kisse dead Caesars wounds,And dip their Napkins in his Sacred Blood;Yea, begge a haire of him for Memory,And dying, mention it within their Willes,Bequeathing it as a rich LegacieVnto their issue   4 Wee'l heare the Will, reade it Marke Antony   All.
The Will, the Will; we will heare Caesars Will   Ant.
Haue patience gentle Friends, I must not read it.
It is not meete you know how Caesar lou'd you:You are not Wood, you are not Stones, but men:And being men, hearing the Will of Caesar,It will inflame you, it will make you mad:'Tis good you know not that you are his Heires,For if you should, O what would come of it?
4 Read the Will, wee'l heare it Antony:You shall reade vs the Will, Caesars Will   Ant.
Will you be Patient?
Will you stay a-while?
I haue o're-shot my selfe to tell you of it,I feare I wrong the Honourable men,Whose Daggers haue stabb'd Caesar: I do feare it   4 They were Traitors: Honourable men?
All.
The Will, the Testament   2 They were Villaines, Murderers: the Will, read theWill   Ant.
You will compell me then to read the Will:Then make a Ring about the Corpes of Caesar,And let me shew you him that made the Will:Shall I descend?
And will you giue me leaue?
All.
Come downe   2 Descend   3 You shall haue leaue   4 A Ring, stand round   1 Stand from the Hearse, stand from the Body   2 Roome for Antony, most Noble Antony   Ant.
Nay presse not so vpon me, stand farre off   All.
Stand backe: roome, beare backe   Ant.
If you haue teares, prepare to shed them now.
You all do know this Mantle, I rememberThe first time euer Caesar put it on,'Twas on a Summers Euening in his Tent,That day he ouercame the Neruij.
Looke, in this place ran Cassius Dagger through:See what a rent the enuious Caska made:Through this, the wel-beloued Brutus stabb'd,And as he pluck'd his cursed Steele away:Marke how the blood of Caesar followed it,As rushing out of doores, to be resolu'dIf Brutus so vnkindely knock'd, or no:For Brutus, as you know, was Caesars Angel.
Iudge, O you Gods, how deerely Caesar lou'd him:This was the most vnkindest cut of all.
For when the Noble Caesar saw him stab,Ingratitude, more strong then Traitors armes,Quite vanquish'd him: then burst his Mighty heart,And in his Mantle, muffling vp his face,Euen at the Base of Pompeyes Statue(Which all the while ran blood) great Caesar fell.
O what a fall was there, my Countrymen?
Then I, and you, and all of vs fell downe,Whil'st bloody Treason flourish'd ouer vs.O now you weepe, and I perceiue you feeleThe dint of pitty: These are gracious droppes.
Kinde Soules, what weepe you, when you but beholdOur Caesars Vesture wounded?
Looke you heere,Heere is Himselfe, marr'd as you see with Traitors   1.
O pitteous spectacle!
2.
O Noble Caesar!
3.
O wofull day!
4.
O Traitors, Villaines!
1.
O most bloody sight!
2.
We will be reueng'd: ReuengeAbout, seeke, burne, fire, kill, slay,Let not a Traitor liue   Ant.
Stay Country-men   1.
Peace there, heare the Noble Antony   2.
Wee'l heare him, wee'l follow him, wee'l dy withhim   Ant.
Good Friends, sweet Friends, let me not stirre you vpTo such a sodaine Flood of Mutiny:They that haue done this Deede, are honourable.
What priuate greefes they haue, alas I know not,That made them do it: They are Wise, and Honourable,And will no doubt with Reasons answer you.
I come not (Friends) to steale away your hearts,I am no Orator, as Brutus is:But (as you know me all) a plaine blunt manThat loue my Friend, and that they know full well,That gaue me publike leaue to speake of him:For I haue neyther writ nor words, nor worth,Action, nor Vtterance, nor the power of Speech,To stirre mens Blood.
I onely speake right on:I tell you that, which you your selues do know,Shew you sweet Caesars wounds, poor poor dum mouthsAnd bid them speake for me: But were I Brutus,And Brutus Antony, there were an AntonyWould ruffle vp your Spirits, and put a TongueIn euery Wound of Caesar, that should moueThe stones of Rome, to rise and Mutiny   All.
Wee'l Mutiny   1 Wee'l burne the house of Brutus   3 Away then, come, seeke the Conspirators   Ant.
Yet heare me Countrymen, yet heare me speake  All.
Peace hoe, heare Antony, most Noble Antony   Ant.
Why Friends, you go to do you know not what:Wherein hath Caesar thus deseru'd your loues?
Alas you know not, I must tell you then:You haue forgot the Will I told you of   All.
Most true, the Will, let's stay and heare the Wil   Ant.
Heere is the Will, and vnder Caesars Seale:To euery Roman Citizen he giues,To euery seuerall man, seuenty fiue Drachmaes   2 Ple.
Most Noble Caesar, wee'l reuenge his death   3 Ple.
O Royall Caesar   Ant.
Heare me with patience   All.
Peace hoe  Ant.
Moreouer, he hath left you all his Walkes,His priuate Arbors, and new-planted Orchards,On this side Tyber, he hath left them you,And to your heyres for euer: common pleasuresTo walke abroad, and recreate your selues.
Heere was a Caesar: when comes such another?
1.Ple.
Neuer, neuer: come, away, away:Wee'l burne his body in the holy place,And with the Brands fire the Traitors houses.
Take vp the body   2.Ple.
Go fetch fire   3.Ple.
Plucke downe Benches   4.Ple.
Plucke downe Formes, Windowes, any thing.
Exit Plebeians.
Ant.
Now let it worke: Mischeefe thou art a-foot,Take thou what course thou wilt.
How now Fellow?
Enter Seruant.
Ser.
Sir, Octauius is already come to Rome   Ant.
Where is hee?
Ser.
He and Lepidus are at Caesars house   Ant.
And thither will I straight, to visit him:He comes vpon a wish.
Fortune is merry,And in this mood will giue vs any thing   Ser.
I heard him say, Brutus and CassiusAre rid like Madmen through the Gates of Rome   Ant.
Belike they had some notice of the peopleHow I had moued them.
Bring me to Octauius.
Exeunt.
Enter Cinna the Poet, and after him the Plebeians.
Cinna.
I dreamt to night, that I did feast with Caesar,And things vnluckily charge my Fantasie:I haue no will to wander foorth of doores,Yet something leads me foorth   1.
What is your name?
2.
Whether are you going?
3.
Where do you dwell?
4.
Are you a married man, or a Batchellor?
2.
Answer euery man directly   1.
I, and breefely   4.
I, and wisely   3.
I, and truly, you were best   Cin.
What is my name?
Whether am I going?
Wheredo I dwell?
Am I a married man, or a Batchellour?
Thento answer euery man, directly and breefely, wisely andtruly: wisely I say, I am a Batchellor   2 That's as much as to say, they are fooles that marrie:you'l beare me a bang for that I feare: proceede directly   Cinna.
Directly I am going to Caesars Funerall   1.
As a Friend, or an Enemy?
Cinna.
As a friend   2.
That matter is answered directly   4.
For your dwelling: breefely   Cinna.
Breefely, I dwell by the Capitoll   3.
Your name sir, truly   Cinna.
Truly, my name is Cinna   1.
Teare him to peeces, hee's a Conspirator   Cinna.
I am Cinna the Poet, I am Cinna the Poet   4.
Teare him for his bad verses, teare him for his badVerses   Cin.
I am not Cinna the Conspirator   4.
It is no matter, his name's Cinna, plucke but hisname out of his heart, and turne him going   3.
Teare him, tear him; Come Brands hoe, Firebrands:to Brutus, to Cassius, burne all.
Some to Decius House,and some to Caska's; some to Ligarius: Away, go.
Exeunt.
all the Plebeians.
Actus Quartus.
Enter Antony, Octauius, and Lepidus.
Ant.
These many then shall die, their names are prickt  Octa.
Your Brother too must dye: consent you Lepidus?
Lep.
I do consent   Octa.
Pricke him downe Antony   Lep.
Vpon condition Publius shall not liue,Who is your Sisters sonne, Marke Antony   Ant.
He shall not liue; looke, with a spot I dam him.
But Lepidus, go you to Caesars house:Fetch the Will hither, and we shall determineHow to cut off some charge in Legacies   Lep.
What?
shall I finde you heere?
Octa.
Or heere, or at the Capitoll.
Exit Lepidus  Ant.
This is a slight vnmeritable man,Meet to be sent on Errands: is it fitThe three-fold World diuided, he should standOne of the three to share it?
Octa.
So you thought him,And tooke his voyce who should be prickt to dyeIn our blacke Sentence and Proscription   Ant.
Octauius, I haue seene more dayes then you,And though we lay these Honours on this man,To ease our selues of diuers sland'rous loads,He shall but beare them, as the Asse beares Gold,To groane and swet vnder the Businesse,Either led or driuen, as we point the way:And hauing brought our Treasure, where we will,Then take we downe his Load, and turne him off(Like to the empty Asse) to shake his eares,And graze in Commons   Octa.
You may do your will:But hee's a tried, and valiant Souldier   Ant.
So is my Horse Octauius, and for thatI do appoint him store of Prouender.
It is a Creature that I teach to fight,To winde, to stop, to run directly on:His corporall Motion, gouern'd by my Spirit,And in some taste, is Lepidus but so:He must be taught, and train'd, and bid go forth:A barren spirited Fellow; one that feedsOn Obiects, Arts, and Imitations.
Which out of vse, and stal'de by other menBegin his fashion.
Do not talke of him,But as a property: and now Octauius,Listen great things.
Brutus and CassiusAre leuying Powers; We must straight make head:Therefore let our Alliance be combin'd,Our best Friends made, our meanes stretcht,And let vs presently go sit in Councell,How couert matters may be best disclos'd,And open Perils surest answered   Octa.
Let vs do so: for we are at the stake,And bayed about with many Enemies,And some that smile haue in their hearts I feareMillions of Mischeefes.
Exeunt.
Drum.
Enter Brutus, Lucillius, and the Army.
Titinius andPindarus meetethem.
Bru.
Stand ho   Lucil.
Giue the word ho, and Stand   Bru.
What now Lucillius, is Cassius neere?
Lucil.
He is at hand, and Pindarus is comeTo do you salutation from his Master   Bru.
He greets me well.
Your Master PindarusIn his owne change, or by ill Officers,Hath giuen me some worthy cause to wishThings done, vndone: But if he be at handI shall be satisfied   Pin.
I do not doubtBut that my Noble Master will appeareSuch as he is, full of regard, and Honour   Bru.
He is not doubted.
A word LucilliusHow he receiu'd you: let me be resolu'd   Lucil.
With courtesie, and with respect enough,But not with such familiar instances,Nor with such free and friendly ConferenceAs he hath vs'd of old   Bru.
Thou hast describ'dA hot Friend, cooling: Euer note Lucillius,When Loue begins to sicken and decayIt vseth an enforced Ceremony.
There are no trickes, in plaine and simple Faith:But hollow men, like Horses hot at hand,Make gallant shew, and promise of their Mettle:Low March within.
But when they should endure the bloody Spurre,They fall their Crests, and like deceitfull IadesSinke in the Triall.
Comes his Army on?
Lucil.
They meane this night in Sardis to be quarter'd:The greater part, the Horse in generallAre come with Cassius.
Enter Cassius and his Powers.
Bru.
Hearke, he is arriu'd:March gently on to meete him   Cassi.
Stand ho   Bru.
Stand ho, speake the word along.
Stand.
Stand.
Stand   Cassi.
Most Noble Brother, you haue done me wrong   Bru.
Iudge me you Gods; wrong I mine Enemies?
And if not so, how should I wrong a Brother   Cassi.
Brutus, this sober forme of yours, hides wrongs,And when you do them-  Brut.
Cassius, be content,Speake your greefes softly, I do know you well.
Before the eyes of both our Armies heere(Which should perceiue nothing but Loue from vs)Let vs not wrangle.
Bid them moue away:Then in my Tent Cassius enlarge your Greefes,And I will giue you Audience   Cassi.
Pindarus,Bid our Commanders leade their Charges offA little from this ground   Bru.
Lucillius, do you the like, and let no manCome to our Tent, till we haue done our Conference.
Let Lucius and Titinius guard our doore.
Exeunt.
Manet Brutus and Cassius.
Cassi.
That you haue wrong'd me, doth appear in this:You haue condemn'd, and noted Lucius PellaFor taking Bribes heere of the Sardians;Wherein my Letters, praying on his side,Because I knew the man was slighted off   Bru.
You wrong'd your selfe to write in such a case   Cassi.
In such a time as this, it is not meetThat euery nice offence should beare his Comment   Bru.
Let me tell you Cassius, you your selfeAre much condemn'd to haue an itching Palme,To sell, and Mart your Offices for GoldTo Vndeseruers   Cassi.
I, an itching Palme?
You know that you are Brutus that speakes this,Or by the Gods, this speech were else your last   Bru.
The name of Cassius Honors this corruption,And Chasticement doth therefore hide his head   Cassi.
Chasticement?
Bru.
Remember March, the Ides of March reme[m]ber:Did not great Iulius bleede for Iustice sake?
What Villaine touch'd his body, that did stab,And not for Iustice?
What?
Shall one of Vs,That strucke the Formost man of all this World,But for supporting Robbers: shall we now,Contaminate our fingers, with base Bribes?
And sell the mighty space of our large HonorsFor so much trash, as may be grasped thus?
I had rather be a Dogge, and bay the Moone,Then such a Roman   Cassi.
Brutus, baite not me,Ile not indure it: you forget your selfeTo hedge me in.
I am a Souldier, I,Older in practice, Abler then your selfeTo make Conditions   Bru.
Go too: you are not Cassius   Cassi.
I am   Bru.
I say, you are not   Cassi.
Vrge me no more, I shall forget my selfe:Haue minde vpon your health: Tempt me no farther   Bru.
Away slight man   Cassi.
Is't possible?
Bru.
Heare me, for I will speake.
Must I giue way, and roome to your rash Choller?
Shall I be frighted, when a Madman stares?
Cassi.
O ye Gods, ye Gods, Must I endure all this?
Bru.
All this?
I more: Fret till your proud hart break.
Go shew your Slaues how Chollericke you are,And make your Bondmen tremble.
Must I bouge?
Must I obserue you?
Must I stand and crouchVnder your Testie Humour?
By the Gods,You shall digest the Venom of your SpleeneThough it do Split you.
For, from this day forth,Ile vse you for my Mirth, yea for my LaughterWhen you are Waspish   Cassi.
Is it come to this?
Bru.
You say, you are a better Souldier:Let it appeare so; make your vaunting true,And it shall please me well.
For mine owne part,I shall be glad to learne of Noble men   Cass.
You wrong me euery way:You wrong me Brutus:I saide, an Elder Souldier, not a Better.
Did I say Better?
Bru.
If you did, I care not   Cass.
When Caesar liu'd, he durst not thus haue mou'd me   Brut.
Peace, peace, you durst not so haue tempted him   Cassi.
I durst not   Bru.
No   Cassi.
What?
durst not tempt him?
Bru.
For your life you durst not   Cassi.
Do not presume too much vpon my Loue,I may do that I shall be sorry for   Bru.
You haue done that you should be sorry for.
There is no terror Cassius in your threats:For I am Arm'd so strong in Honesty,That they passe by me, as the idle winde,Which I respect not.
I did send to youFor certaine summes of Gold, which you deny'd me,For I can raise no money by vile meanes:By Heauen, I had rather Coine my Heart,And drop my blood for Drachmaes, then to wringFrom the hard hands of Peazants, their vile trashBy any indirection.
I did sendTo you for Gold to pay my Legions,Which you deny'd me: was that done like Cassius?
Should I haue answer'd Caius Cassius so?
When Marcus Brutus growes so Couetous,To locke such Rascall Counters from his Friends,Be ready Gods with all your Thunder-bolts,Dash him to peeces   Cassi.
I deny'd you not   Bru.
You did   Cassi.
I did not.
He was but a FooleThat brought my answer back.
Brutus hath riu'd my hart:A Friend should beare his Friends infirmities;But Brutus makes mine greater then they are   Bru.
I do not, till you practice them on me   Cassi.
You loue me not   Bru.
I do not like your faults   Cassi.
A friendly eye could neuer see such faults   Bru.
A Flatterers would not, though they do appeareAs huge as high Olympus   Cassi.
Come Antony, and yong Octauius come,Reuenge your selues alone on Cassius,For Cassius is a-weary of the World:Hated by one he loues, brau'd by his Brother,Check'd like a bondman, all his faults obseru'd,Set in a Note-booke, learn'd, and con'd by roateTo cast into my Teeth.
O I could weepeMy Spirit from mine eyes.
There is my Dagger,And heere my naked Breast: Within, a HeartDeerer then Pluto's Mine, Richer then Gold:If that thou bee'st a Roman, take it foorth.
I that deny'd thee Gold, will giue my Heart:Strike as thou did'st at Caesar: For I know,When thou did'st hate him worst, y loued'st him betterThen euer thou loued'st Cassius   Bru.
Sheath your Dagger:Be angry when you will, it shall haue scope:Do what you will, Dishonor, shall be Humour.
O Cassius, you are yoaked with a LambeThat carries Anger, as the Flint beares fire,Who much inforced, shewes a hastie Sparke,And straite is cold agen   Cassi.
Hath Cassius liu'dTo be but Mirth and Laughter to his Brutus,When greefe and blood ill temper'd, vexeth him?
Bru.
When I spoke that, I was ill temper'd too   Cassi.
Do you confesse so much?
Giue me your hand   Bru.
And my heart too   Cassi.
O Brutus!
Bru.
What's the matter?
Cassi.
Haue not you loue enough to beare with me,When that rash humour which my Mother gaue meMakes me forgetfull   Bru.
Yes Cassius, and from henceforthWhen you are ouer-earnest with your Brutus,Hee'l thinke your Mother chides, and leaue you so.
Enter a Poet.
Poet.
Let me go in to see the Generals,There is some grudge betweene 'em, 'tis not meeteThey be alone   Lucil.
You shall not come to them   Poet.
Nothing but death shall stay me   Cas.
How now?
What's the matter?
Poet.
For shame you Generals; what do you meane?
Loue, and be Friends, as two such men should bee,For I haue seene more yeeres I'me sure then yee   Cas.
Ha, ha, how vildely doth this Cynicke rime?
Bru.
Get you hence sirra: Sawcy Fellow, hence   Cas.
Beare with him Brutus, 'tis his fashion   Brut.
Ile know his humor, when he knowes his time:What should the Warres do with these Iigging Fooles?
Companion, hence   Cas.
Away, away be gone.
Exit Poet  Bru.
Lucillius and Titinius bid the CommandersPrepare to lodge their Companies to night   Cas.
And come your selues, & bring Messala with youImmediately to vs   Bru.
Lucius, a bowle of Wine   Cas.
I did not thinke you could haue bin so angry   Bru.
O Cassius, I am sicke of many greefes   Cas.
Of your Philosophy you make no vse,If you giue place to accidentall euils   Bru.
No man beares sorrow better.
Portia is dead   Cas.
Ha?
Portia?
Bru.
She is dead   Cas.
How scap'd I killing, when I crost you so?
O insupportable, and touching losse!
Vpon what sicknesse?
Bru.
Impatient of my absence,And greefe, that yong Octauius with Mark AntonyHaue made themselues so strong: For with her deathThat tydings came.
With this she fell distract,And (her Attendants absent) swallow'd fire   Cas.
And dy'd so?
Bru.
Euen so   Cas.
O ye immortall Gods!
Enter Boy with Wine, and Tapers.
Bru.
Speak no more of her: Giue me a bowl of wine,In this I bury all vnkindnesse Cassius.
Drinkes  Cas.
My heart is thirsty for that Noble pledge.
Fill Lucius, till the Wine ore-swell the Cup:I cannot drinke too much of Brutus loue.
Enter Titinius and Messala.
Brutus.
Come in Titinius:Welcome good Messala:Now sit we close about this Taper heere,And call in question our necessities   Cass.
Portia, art thou gone?
Bru.
No more I pray you.
Messala, I haue heere receiued Letters,That yong Octauius, and Marke AntonyCome downe vpon vs with a mighty power,Bending their Expedition toward Philippi   Mess.
My selfe haue Letters of the selfe-same Tenure   Bru.
With what Addition   Mess.
That by proscription, and billes of Outlarie,Octauius, Antony, and Lepidus,Haue put to death, an hundred Senators   Bru.
Therein our Letters do not well agree:Mine speake of seuenty Senators, that dy'deBy their proscriptions, Cicero being one   Cassi.
Cicero one?
Messa.
Cicero is dead, and by that order of proscriptionHad you your Letters from your wife, my Lord?
Bru.
No Messala   Messa.
Nor nothing in your Letters writ of her?
Bru.
Nothing Messala   Messa.
That me thinkes is strange   Bru.
Why aske you?
Heare you ought of her, in yours?
Messa.
No my Lord   Bru.
Now as you are a Roman tell me true   Messa.
Then like a Roman, beare the truth I tell,For certaine she is dead, and by strange manner   Bru.
Why farewell Portia: We must die Messala:With meditating that she must dye once,I haue the patience to endure it now   Messa.
Euen so great men, great losses shold indure   Cassi.
I haue as much of this in Art as you,But yet my Nature could not beare it so   Bru.
Well, to our worke aliue.
What do you thinkeOf marching to Philippi presently   Cassi.
I do not thinke it good   Bru.
Your reason?
Cassi.
This it is:'Tis better that the Enemie seeke vs,So shall he waste his meanes, weary his Souldiers,Doing himselfe offence, whil'st we lying still,Are full of rest, defence, and nimblenesse   Bru.
Good reasons must of force giue place to better:The people 'twixt Philippi, and this groundDo stand but in a forc'd affection:For they haue grug'd vs Contribution.
The Enemy, marching along by them,By them shall make a fuller number vp,Come on refresht, new added, and encourag'd:From which aduantage shall we cut him off.
If at Philippi we do face him there,These people at our backe   Cassi.
Heare me good Brother   Bru.
Vnder your pardon.
You must note beside,That we haue tride the vtmost of our Friends:Our Legions are brim full, our cause is ripe,The Enemy encreaseth euery day,We at the height, are readie to decline.
There is a Tide in the affayres of men,Which taken at the Flood, leades on to Fortune:Omitted, all the voyage of their life,Is bound in Shallowes, and in Miseries.
On such a full Sea are we now a-float,And we must take the current when it serues,Or loose our Ventures   Cassi.
Then with your will go on: wee'l alongOur selues, and meet them at Philippi   Bru.
The deepe of night is crept vpon our talke,And Nature must obey Necessitie,Which we will niggard with a little rest:There is no more to say   Cassi.
No more, good night,Early to morrow will we rise, and hence.
Enter Lucius.
Bru.
Lucius my Gowne: farewell good Messala,Good night Titinius: Noble, Noble Cassius,Good night, and good repose   Cassi.
O my deere Brother:This was an ill beginning of the night:Neuer come such diuision 'tweene our soules:Let it not Brutus.
Enter Lucius with the Gowne.
Bru.
Euery thing is well   Cassi.
Good night my Lord   Bru.
Good night good Brother   Tit.
Messa.
Good night Lord Brutus   Bru.
Farwell euery one.
Exeunt.
Giue me the Gowne.
Where is thy Instrument?
Luc.
Heere in the Tent   Bru.
What, thou speak'st drowsily?
Poore knaue I blame thee not, thou art ore-watch'd.
Call Claudio, and some other of my men,Ile haue them sleepe on Cushions in my Tent   Luc.
Varrus, and Claudio.
Enter Varrus and Claudio.
Var.
Cals my Lord?
Bru.
I pray you sirs, lye in my Tent and sleepe,It may be I shall raise you by and byOn businesse to my Brother Cassius   Var.
So please you, we will stand,And watch your pleasure   Bru.
I will it not haue it so: Lye downe good sirs,It may be I shall otherwise bethinke me.
Looke Lucius, heere's the booke I sought for so:I put it in the pocket of my Gowne   Luc.
I was sure your Lordship did not giue it me   Bru.
Beare with me good Boy, I am much forgetfull.
Canst thou hold vp thy heauie eyes a-while,And touch thy Instrument a straine or two   Luc.
I my Lord, an't please you   Bru.
It does my Boy:I trouble thee too much, but thou art willing   Luc.
It is my duty Sir   Brut.
I should not vrge thy duty past thy might,I know yong bloods looke for a time of rest   Luc.
I haue slept my Lord already   Bru.
It was well done, and thou shalt sleepe againe:I will not hold thee long.
If I do liue,I will be good to thee.
Musicke, and a Song.
This is a sleepy Tune: O Murd'rous slumber!
Layest thou thy Leaden Mace vpon my Boy,That playes thee Musicke?
Gentle knaue good night:I will not do thee so much wrong to wake thee:If thou do'st nod, thou break'st thy Instrument,Ile take it from thee, and (good Boy) good night.
Let me see, let me see; is not the Leafe turn'd downeWhere I left reading?
Heere it is I thinke.
Enter the Ghost of Caesar.
How ill this Taper burnes.
Ha!
Who comes heere?
I thinke it is the weakenesse of mine eyesThat shapes this monstrous Apparition.
It comes vpon me: Art thou any thing?
Art thou some God, some Angell, or some Diuell,That mak'st my blood cold, and my haire to stare?
Speake to me, what thou art   Ghost.
Thy euill Spirit Brutus?
Bru.
Why com'st thou?
Ghost.
To tell thee thou shalt see me at Philippi   Brut.
Well: then I shall see thee againe?
Ghost.
I, at Philippi   Brut.
Why I will see thee at Philippi then:Now I haue taken heart, thou vanishest.
Ill Spirit, I would hold more talke with thee.
Boy, Lucius, Varrus, Claudio, Sirs: Awake:Claudio   Luc.
The strings my Lord, are false   Bru.
He thinkes he still is at his Instrument.
Lucius, awake   Luc.
My Lord   Bru.
Did'st thou dreame Lucius, that thou so cryedstout?
Luc.
My Lord, I do not know that I did cry   Bru.
Yes that thou did'st: Did'st thou see any thing?
Luc.
Nothing my Lord   Bru.
Sleepe againe Lucius: Sirra Claudio, Fellow,Thou: Awake   Var.
My Lord   Clau.
My Lord   Bru.
Why did you so cry out sirs, in your sleepe?
Both.
Did we my Lord?
Bru.
I: saw you any thing?
Var.
No my Lord, I saw nothing   Clau.
Nor I my Lord   Bru.
Go, and commend me to my Brother Cassius:Bid him set on his Powres betimes before,And we will follow   Both.
It shall be done my Lord.
Exeunt.
Actus Quintus.
Enter Octauius, Antony, and their Army.
Octa.
Now Antony, our hopes are answered,You said the Enemy would not come downe,But keepe the Hilles and vpper Regions:It proues not so: their battailes are at hand,They meane to warne vs at Philippi heere:Answering before we do demand of them   Ant.
Tut I am in their bosomes, and I knowWherefore they do it: They could be contentTo visit other places, and come downeWith fearefull brauery: thinking by this faceTo fasten in our thoughts that they haue Courage;But 'tis not so.
Enter a Messenger.
Mes.
Prepare you Generals,The Enemy comes on in gallant shew:Their bloody signe of Battell is hung out,And something to be done immediately   Ant.
Octauius, leade your Battaile softly onVpon the left hand of the euen Field   Octa.
Vpon the right hand I, keepe thou the left   Ant.
Why do you crosse me in this exigent   Octa.
I do not crosse you: but I will do so.
March.
Drum.
Enter Brutus, Cassius, & their Army.
Bru.
They stand, and would haue parley   Cassi.
Stand fast Titinius, we must out and talke   Octa.
Mark Antony, shall we giue signe of Battaile?
Ant.
No Caesar, we will answer on their Charge.
Make forth, the Generals would haue some words   Oct. Stirre not vntill the Signall   Bru.
Words before blowes: is it so Countrymen?
Octa.
Not that we loue words better, as you do   Bru.
Good words are better then bad strokes Octauius   An.
In your bad strokes Brutus, you giue good wordsWitnesse the hole you made in Caesars heart,Crying long liue, Haile Caesar   Cassi.
Antony,The posture of your blowes are yet vnknowne;But for your words, they rob the Hibla Bees,And leaue them Hony-lesse   Ant.
Not stinglesse too   Bru.
O yes, and soundlesse too:For you haue stolne their buzzing Antony,And very wisely threat before you sting   Ant.
Villains: you did not so, when your vile daggersHackt one another in the sides of Caesar:You shew'd your teethes like Apes,And fawn'd like Hounds,And bow'd like Bondmen, kissing Caesars feete;Whil'st damned Caska, like a Curre, behindeStrooke Caesar on the necke.
O you Flatterers   Cassi.
Flatterers?
Now Brutus thanke your selfe,This tongue had not offended so to day.
If Cassius might haue rul'd   Octa.
Come, come, the cause.
If arguing make vs swet,The proofe of it will turne to redder drops:Looke, I draw a Sword against Conspirators,When thinke you that the Sword goes vp againe?
Neuer till Caesars three and thirtie woundsBe well aueng'd; or till another CaesarHaue added slaughter to the Sword of Traitors   Brut.
Caesar, thou canst not dye by Traitors hands.
Vnlesse thou bring'st them with thee   Octa.
So I hope:I was not borne to dye on Brutus Sword   Bru.
O if thou wer't the Noblest of thy Straine,Yong-man, thou could'st not dye more honourable   Cassi.
A peeuish School-boy, worthles of such HonorIoyn'd with a Masker, and a Reueller   Ant.
Old Cassius still   Octa.
Come Antony: away:Defiance Traitors, hurle we in your teeth.
If you dare fight to day, come to the Field;If not, when you haue stomackes.
Exit Octauius, Antony, and Army  Cassi.
Why now blow winde, swell Billow,And swimme Barke:The Storme is vp, and all is on the hazard   Bru.
Ho Lucillius, hearke, a word with you.
Lucillius and Messala stand forth.
Luc.
My Lord   Cassi.
Messala   Messa.
What sayes my Generall?
Cassi.
Messala, this is my Birth-day: at this very dayWas Cassius borne.
Giue me thy hand Messala:Be thou my witnesse, that against my will(As Pompey was) am I compell'd to setVpon one Battell all our Liberties.
You know, that I held Epicurus strong,And his Opinion: Now I change my minde,And partly credit things that do presage.
Comming from Sardis, on our former EnsigneTwo mighty Eagles fell, and there they pearch'd,Gorging and feeding from our Soldiers hands,Who to Philippi heere consorted vs:This Morning are they fled away, and gone,And in their steeds, do Rauens, Crowes, and KitesFly ore our heads, and downward looke on vsAs we were sickely prey; their shadowes seemeA Canopy most fatall, vnder whichOur Army lies, ready to giue vp the Ghost   Messa.
Beleeue not so   Cassi.
I but beleeue it partly,For I am fresh of spirit, and resolu'dTo meete all perils, very constantly   Bru.
Euen so Lucillius   Cassi.
Now most Noble Brutus,The Gods to day stand friendly, that we mayLouers in peace, leade on our dayes to age.
But since the affayres of men rests still incertaine,Let's reason with the worst that may befall.
If we do lose this Battaile, then is thisThe very last time we shall speake together:What are you then determined to do?
Bru.
Euen by the rule of that Philosophy,By which I did blame Cato, for the deathWhich he did giue himselfe, I know not how:But I do finde it Cowardly, and vile,For feare of what might fall, so to preuentThe time of life, arming my selfe with patience,To stay the prouidence of some high Powers,That gouerne vs below   Cassi.
Then, if we loose this Battaile,You are contented to be led in TriumphThorow the streets of Rome   Bru.
No Cassius, no:Thinke not thou Noble Romane,That euer Brutus will go bound to Rome,He beares too great a minde.
But this same dayMust end that worke, the Ides of March begun.
And whether we shall meete againe, I know not:Therefore our euerlasting farewell take:For euer, and for euer, farewell Cassius,If we do meete againe, why we shall smile;If not, why then this parting was well made   Cassi.
For euer, and for euer, farewell Brutus:If we do meete againe, wee'l smile indeede;If not, 'tis true, this parting was well made   Bru.
Why then leade on.
O that a man might knowThe end of this dayes businesse, ere it come:But it sufficeth, that the day will end,And then the end is knowne.
Come ho, away.
Exeunt.
Alarum.
Enter Brutus and Messala.
Bru.
Ride, ride Messala, ride and giue these BillesVnto the Legions, on the other side.
Lowd Alarum.
Let them set on at once: for I perceiueBut cold demeanor in Octauio's wing:And sodaine push giues them the ouerthrow:Ride, ride Messala, let them all come downe.
Exeunt.
Alarums.
Enter Cassius and Titinius.
Cassi.
O looke Titinius, looke, the Villaines flye:My selfe haue to mine owne turn'd Enemy:This Ensigne heere of mine was turning backe,I slew the Coward, and did take it from him   Titin.
O Cassius, Brutus gaue the word too early,Who hauing some aduantage on Octauius,Tooke it too eagerly: his Soldiers fell to spoyle,Whilst we by Antony are all inclos'd.
Enter Pindarus.
Pind.
Fly further off my Lord: flye further off,Mark Antony is in your Tents my Lord:Flye therefore Noble Cassius, flye farre off   Cassi.
This Hill is farre enough.
Looke, look TitiniusAre those my Tents where I perceiue the fire?
Tit.
They are, my Lord   Cassi.
Titinius, if thou louest me,Mount thou my horse, and hide thy spurres in him,Till he haue brought thee vp to yonder TroopesAnd heere againe, that I may rest assur'dWhether yond Troopes, are Friend or Enemy   Tit.
I will be heere againe, euen with a thought.
Enter.
Cassi.
Go Pindarus, get higher on that hill,My sight was euer thicke: regard Titinius,And tell me what thou not'st about the Field.
This day I breathed first, Time is come round,And where I did begin, there shall I end,My life is run his compasse.
Sirra, what newes?
Pind.
Aboue.
O my Lord   Cassi.
What newes?
Pind.
Titinius is enclosed round aboutWith Horsemen, that make to him on the Spurre,Yet he spurres on.
Now they are almost on him:Now Titinius.
Now some light: O he lights too.
Hee's tane.
Showt.
And hearke, they shout for ioy   Cassi.
Come downe, behold no more:O Coward that I am, to liue so long,To see my best Friend tane before my faceEnter Pindarus.
Come hither sirrah: In Parthia did I take thee Prisoner,And then I swore thee, sauing of thy life,That whatsoeuer I did bid thee do,Thou should'st attempt it.
Come now, keepe thine oath,Now be a Free-man, and with this good SwordThat ran through Caesars bowels, search this bosome.
Stand not to answer: Heere, take thou the Hilts,And when my face is couer'd, as 'tis now,Guide thou the Sword- Caesar, thou art reueng'd,Euen with the Sword that kill'd thee   Pin.
So, I am free,Yet would not so haue beeneDurst I haue done my will.
O Cassius,Farre from this Country Pindarus shall run,Where neuer Roman shall take note of him.
Enter Titinius and Messala.
Messa.
It is but change, Titinius: for OctauiusIs ouerthrowne by Noble Brutus power,As Cassius Legions are by Antony   Titin.
These tydings will well comfort Cassius   Messa.
Where did you leaue him   Titin.
All disconsolate,With Pindarus his Bondman, on this Hill   Messa.
Is not that he that lyes vpon the ground?
Titin.
He lies not like the Liuing.
O my heart!
Messa.
Is not that hee?
Titin.
No, this was he Messala,But Cassius is no more.
O setting Sunne:As in thy red Rayes thou doest sinke to night;So in his red blood Cassius day is set.
The Sunne of Rome is set.
Our day is gone,Clowds, Dewes, and Dangers come; our deeds are done:Mistrust of my successe hath done this deed   Messa.
Mistrust of good successe hath done this deed.
O hatefull Error, Melancholies Childe:Why do'st thou shew to the apt thoughts of menThe things that are not?
O Error soone conceyu'd,Thou neuer com'st vnto a happy byrth,But kil'st the Mother that engendred thee   Tit.
What Pindarus?
Where art thou Pindarus?
Messa.
Seeke him Titinius, whilst I go to meetThe Noble Brutus, thrusting this reportInto his eares; I may say thrusting it:For piercing Steele, and Darts inuenomed,Shall be as welcome to the eares of Brutus,As tydings of this sight   Tit.
Hye you Messala,And I will seeke for Pindarus the while:Why did'st thou send me forth braue Cassius?
Did I not meet thy Friends, and did not theyPut on my Browes this wreath of Victorie,And bid me giue it thee?
Did'st thou not heare their showts?
Alas, thou hast misconstrued euery thing.
But hold thee, take this Garland on thy Brow,Thy Brutus bid me giue it thee, and IWill do his bidding.
Brutus, come apace,And see how I regarded Caius Cassius:By your leaue Gods: This is a Romans part,Come Cassius Sword, and finde Titinius hart.
DiesAlarum.
Enter Brutus, Messala, yong Cato, Strato, Volumnius, andLucillius.
Bru.
Where, where Messala, doth his body lye?
Messa.
Loe yonder, and Titinius mourning it   Bru.
Titinius face is vpward   Cato.
He is slaine   Bru.
O Iulius Caesar, thou art mighty yet,Thy Spirit walkes abroad, and turnes our SwordsIn our owne proper Entrailes.
Low Alarums   Cato.
Braue Titinius,Looke where he haue not crown'd dead Cassius   Bru.
Are yet two Romans liuing such as these?
The last of all the Romans, far thee well:It is impossible, that euer RomeShould breed thy fellow.
Friends I owe mo tearesTo this dead man, then you shall see me pay.
I shall finde time, Cassius: I shall finde time.
Come therefore, and to Tharsus send his body,His Funerals shall not be in our Campe,Least it discomfort vs. Lucillius come,And come yong Cato, let vs to the Field,Labio and Flauio set our Battailes on:'Tis three a clocke, and Romans yet ere night,We shall try Fortune in a second fight.
Exeunt.
Alarum.
Enter Brutus, Messala, Cato, Lucillius, and Flauius.
Bru.
Yet Country-men: O yet, hold vp your heads   Cato.
What Bastard doth not?
Who will go with me?
I will proclaime my name about the Field.
I am the Sonne of Marcus Cato, hoe.
A Foe to Tyrants, and my Countries Friend.
I am the Sonne of Marcus Cato, hoe.
Enter Souldiers, and fight.
And I am Brutus, Marcus Brutus, I,Brutus my Countries Friend: Know me for Brutus   Luc.
O yong and Noble Cato, art thou downe?
Why now thou dyest, as brauely as Titinius,And may'st be honour'd, being Cato's Sonne   Sold.
Yeeld, or thou dyest   Luc.
Onely I yeeld to dye:There is so much, that thou wilt kill me straight:Kill Brutus, and be honour'd in his death   Sold.
We must not: a Noble Prisoner.
Enter Antony.
2.Sold.
Roome hoe: tell Antony, Brutus is tane   1.Sold.
Ile tell thee newes.
Heere comes the Generall,Brutus is tane, Brutus is tane my Lord   Ant.
Where is hee?
Luc.
Safe Antony, Brutus is safe enough:I dare assure thee, that no EnemyShall euer take aliue the Noble Brutus:The Gods defend him from so great a shame,When you do finde him, or aliue, or dead,He will be found like Brutus, like himselfe   Ant.
This is not Brutus friend, but I assure you,A prize no lesse in worth; keepe this man safe,Giue him all kindnesse.
I had rather haueSuch men my Friends, then Enemies.
Go on,And see where Brutus be aliue or dead,And bring vs word, vnto Octauius Tent:How euery thing is chanc'd.
Exeunt.
Enter Brutus, Dardanius, Clitus, Strato, and Volumnius.
Brut.
Come poore remaines of friends, rest on thisRocke   Clit.
Statillius shew'd the Torch-light, but my LordHe came not backe: he is or tane, or slaine   Brut.
Sit thee downe, Clitus: slaying is the word,It is a deed in fashion.
Hearke thee, Clitus   Clit.
What I, my Lord?
No, not for all the World   Brut.
Peace then, no words   Clit.
Ile rather kill my selfe   Brut.
Hearke thee, Dardanius   Dard.
Shall I doe such a deed?
Clit.
O Dardanius   Dard.
O Clitus   Clit.
What ill request did Brutus make to thee?
Dard.
To kill him, Clitus: looke he meditates   Clit.
Now is that Noble Vessell full of griefe,That it runnes ouer euen at his eyes   Brut.
Come hither, good Volumnius, list a word   Volum.
What sayes my Lord?
Brut.
Why this, Volumnius:The Ghost of Caesar hath appear'd to meTwo seuerall times by Night: at Sardis, once;And this last Night, here in Philippi fields:I know my houre is come   Volum.
Not so, my Lord   Brut.
Nay, I am sure it is, Volumnius.
Thou seest the World, Volumnius, how it goes,Our Enemies haue beat vs to the Pit:Low Alarums.
It is more worthy, to leape in our selues,Then tarry till they push vs. Good Volumnius,Thou know'st, that we two went to Schoole together:Euen for that our loue of old, I pretheeHold thou my Sword Hilts, whilest I runne on it   Vol.
That's not an Office for a friend, my Lord.
Alarum still.
Cly.
Fly, flye my Lord, there is no tarrying heere   Bru.
Farewell to you, and you, and Volumnius.
Strato, thou hast bin all this while asleepe:Farewell to thee, to Strato, Countrymen:My heart doth ioy, that yet in all my life,I found no man, but he was true to me.
I shall haue glory by this loosing dayMore then Octauius, and Marke Antony,By this vile Conquest shall attaine vnto.
So fare you well at once, for Brutus tongueHath almost ended his liues History:Night hangs vpon mine eyes, my Bones would rest,That haue but labour'd, to attaine this houre.
Alarum.
Cry within, Flye, flye, flye.
Cly.
Fly my Lord, flye   Bru.
Hence: I will follow:I prythee Strato, stay thou by thy Lord,Thou art a Fellow of a good respect:Thy life hath had some smatch of Honor in it,Hold then my Sword, and turne away thy face,While I do run vpon it.
Wilt thou Strato?
Stra.
Giue me your hand first.
Fare you wel my Lord   Bru.
Farewell good Strato.
- Caesar, now be still,I kill'd not thee with halfe so good a will.
Dyes.
Alarum.
Retreat.
Enter Antony, Octauius, Messala, Lucillius, andtheArmy.
Octa.
What man is that?
Messa.
My Masters man.
Strato, where is thy Master?
Stra.
Free from the Bondage you are in Messala,The Conquerors can but make a fire of him:For Brutus onely ouercame himselfe,And no man else hath Honor by his death   Lucil.
So Brutus should be found.
I thank thee BrutusThat thou hast prou'd Lucillius saying true,  Octa.
All that seru'd Brutus, I will entertaine them.
Fellow, wilt thou bestow thy time with me?
Stra.
I, if Messala will preferre me to you   Octa.
Do so, good Messala   Messa.
How dyed my Master Strato?
Stra.
I held the Sword, and he did run on it   Messa.
Octauius, then take him to follow thee,That did the latest seruice to my Master   Ant.
This was the Noblest Roman of them all:All the Conspirators saue onely hee,Did that they did, in enuy of great Caesar:He, onely in a generall honest thought,And common good to all, made one of them.
His life was gentle, and the ElementsSo mixt in him, that Nature might stand vp,And say to all the world; This was a man   Octa.
According to his Vertue, let vs vse himWithall Respect, and Rites of Buriall.
Within my Tent his bones to night shall ly,Most like a Souldier ordered Honourably:So call the Field to rest, and let's away,To part the glories of this happy day.
Exeunt.
omnes.
FINIS.
THE TRAGEDIE OF IVLIVS CaeSAR.
