[Persuasion by Jane Austen 1818]Chapter 1Sir Walter Elliot, of Kellynch Hall, in Somersetshire, was a man who,for his own amusement, never took up any book but the Baronetage;there he found occupation for an idle hour, and consolation in adistressed one; there his faculties were roused into admiration andrespect, by contemplating the limited remnant of the earliest patents;there any unwelcome sensations, arising from domestic affairschanged naturally into pity and contempt as he turned overthe almost endless creations of the last century; and there,if every other leaf were powerless, he could read his own historywith an interest which never failed.
This was the page at whichthe favourite volume always opened:           "ELLIOT OF KELLYNCH HALL.
"Walter Elliot, born March 1, 1760, married, July 15, 1784, Elizabeth,daughter of James Stevenson, Esq.
of South Park, in the county ofGloucester, by which lady (who died 1800) he has issue Elizabeth,born June 1, 1785; Anne, born August 9, 1787; a still-born son,November 5, 1789; Mary, born November 20, 1791."
Precisely such had the paragraph originally stood from the printer's hands;but Sir Walter had improved it by adding, for the information ofhimself and his family, these words, after the date of Mary's birth--"Married, December 16, 1810, Charles, son and heir of CharlesMusgrove, Esq.
of Uppercross, in the county of Somerset,"and by inserting most accurately the day of the month on whichhe had lost his wife.
Then followed the history and rise of the ancient and respectable family,in the usual terms; how it had been first settled in Cheshire;how mentioned in Dugdale, serving the office of high sheriff,representing a borough in three successive parliaments,exertions of loyalty, and dignity of baronet, in the first yearof Charles II, with all the Marys and Elizabeths they had married;forming altogether two handsome duodecimo pages, and concluding withthe arms and motto:--"Principal seat, Kellynch Hall, in the countyof Somerset," and Sir Walter's handwriting again in this finale:--"Heir presumptive, William Walter Elliot, Esq., great grandson ofthe second Sir Walter."
Vanity was the beginning and the end of Sir Walter Elliot's character;vanity of person and of situation.
He had been remarkably handsomein his youth; and, at fifty-four, was still a very fine man.
Few women could think more of their personal appearance than he did,nor could the valet of any new made lord be more delighted withthe place he held in society.
He considered the blessing of beautyas inferior only to the blessing of a baronetcy; and the Sir Walter Elliot,who united these gifts, was the constant object of his warmest respectand devotion.
His good looks and his rank had one fair claim on his attachment;since to them he must have owed a wife of very superior characterto any thing deserved by his own.
Lady Elliot had been an excellent woman,sensible and amiable; whose judgement and conduct, if they might bepardoned the youthful infatuation which made her Lady Elliot,had never required indulgence afterwards.--She had humoured,or softened, or concealed his failings, and promoted his realrespectability for seventeen years; and though not the very happiestbeing in the world herself, had found enough in her duties, her friends,and her children, to attach her to life, and make it no matter ofindifference to her when she was called on to quit them.
--Three girls, the two eldest sixteen and fourteen, was an awful legacyfor a mother to bequeath, an awful charge rather, to confide tothe authority and guidance of a conceited, silly father.
She had, however, one very intimate friend, a sensible, deserving woman,who had been brought, by strong attachment to herself, to settleclose by her, in the village of Kellynch; and on her kindness and advice,Lady Elliot mainly relied for the best help and maintenance ofthe good principles and instruction which she had been anxiouslygiving her daughters.
This friend, and Sir Walter, did not marry, whatever might have beenanticipated on that head by their acquaintance.
Thirteen yearshad passed away since Lady Elliot's death, and they were stillnear neighbours and intimate friends, and one remained a widower,the other a widow.
That Lady Russell, of steady age and character, and extremelywell provided for, should have no thought of a second marriage,needs no apology to the public, which is rather apt to be unreasonablydiscontented when a woman does marry again, than when she does not;but Sir Walter's continuing in singleness requires explanation.
Be it known then, that Sir Walter, like a good father, (having met withone or two private disappointments in very unreasonable applications),prided himself on remaining single for his dear daughters' sake.
For one daughter, his eldest, he would really have given up any thing,which he had not been very much tempted to do.
Elizabeth had succeeded,at sixteen, to all that was possible, of her mother's rightsand consequence; and being very handsome, and very like himself,her influence had always been great, and they had gone on togethermost happily.
His two other children were of very inferior value.
Mary had acquired a little artificial importance, by becomingMrs Charles Musgrove; but Anne, with an elegance of mind and sweetnessof character, which must have placed her high with any peopleof real understanding, was nobody with either father or sister;her word had no weight, her convenience was always to give way--she was only Anne.
To Lady Russell, indeed, she was a most dear and highly valuedgod-daughter, favourite, and friend.
Lady Russell loved them all;but it was only in Anne that she could fancy the mother to revive again.
A few years before, Anne Elliot had been a very pretty girl,but her bloom had vanished early; and as even in its height,her father had found little to admire in her, (so totally differentwere her delicate features and mild dark eyes from his own),there could be nothing in them, now that she was faded and thin,to excite his esteem.
He had never indulged much hope, he had now none,of ever reading her name in any other page of his favourite work.
All equality of alliance must rest with Elizabeth, for Mary had merelyconnected herself with an old country family of respectability andlarge fortune, and had therefore given all the honour and received none:Elizabeth would, one day or other, marry suitably.
It sometimes happens that a woman is handsomer at twenty-nine thanshe was ten years before; and, generally speaking, if there has beenneither ill health nor anxiety, it is a time of life at which scarcely anycharm is lost.
It was so with Elizabeth, still the same handsomeMiss Elliot that she had begun to be thirteen years ago, and Sir Waltermight be excused, therefore, in forgetting her age, or, at least,be deemed only half a fool, for thinking himself and Elizabethas blooming as ever, amidst the wreck of the good looks of everybody else;for he could plainly see how old all the rest of his family andacquaintance were growing.
Anne haggard, Mary coarse, every facein the neighbourhood worsting, and the rapid increase of the crow's footabout Lady Russell's temples had long been a distress to him.
Elizabeth did not quite equal her father in personal contentment.
Thirteen years had seen her mistress of Kellynch Hall, presiding anddirecting with a self-possession and decision which could never have giventhe idea of her being younger than she was.
For thirteen years hadshe been doing the honours, and laying down the domestic law at home,and leading the way to the chaise and four, and walking immediately afterLady Russell out of all the drawing-rooms and dining-rooms in the country.
Thirteen winters' revolving frosts had seen her opening every ballof credit which a scanty neighbourhood afforded, and thirteen springsshewn their blossoms, as she travelled up to London with her father,for a few weeks' annual enjoyment of the great world.
She hadthe remembrance of all this, she had the consciousness of beingnine-and-twenty to give her some regrets and some apprehensions;she was fully satisfied of being still quite as handsome as ever,but she felt her approach to the years of danger, and would have rejoicedto be certain of being properly solicited by baronet-blood withinthe next twelvemonth or two.
Then might she again take upthe book of books with as much enjoyment as in her early youth,but now she liked it not.
Always to be presented with the date ofher own birth and see no marriage follow but that of a youngest sister,made the book an evil; and more than once, when her father had left itopen on the table near her, had she closed it, with averted eyes,and pushed it away.
She had had a disappointment, moreover, which that book,and especially the history of her own family, must ever presentthe remembrance of.
The heir presumptive, the very William WalterElliot, Esq., whose rights had been so generously supportedby her father, had disappointed her.
She had, while a very young girl, as soon as she had known him to be,in the event of her having no brother, the future baronet,meant to marry him, and her father had always meant that she should.
He had not been known to them as a boy; but soon after Lady Elliot's death,Sir Walter had sought the acquaintance, and though his overtureshad not been met with any warmth, he had persevered in seeking it,making allowance for the modest drawing-back of youth; and, in one oftheir spring excursions to London, when Elizabeth was in her first bloom,Mr Elliot had been forced into the introduction.
He was at that time a very young man, just engaged in the study of the law;and Elizabeth found him extremely agreeable, and every plan in his favourwas confirmed.
He was invited to Kellynch Hall; he was talked ofand expected all the rest of the year; but he never came.
The following spring he was seen again in town, found equally agreeable,again encouraged, invited, and expected, and again he did not come;and the next tidings were that he was married.
Instead of pushinghis fortune in the line marked out for the heir of the house of Elliot,he had purchased independence by uniting himself to a rich womanof inferior birth.
Sir Walter has resented it.
As the head of the house, he felt thathe ought to have been consulted, especially after taking the young manso publicly by the hand; "For they must have been seen together,"he observed, "once at Tattersall's, and twice in the lobby ofthe House of Commons."
His disapprobation was expressed,but apparently very little regarded.
Mr Elliot had attempted no apology,and shewn himself as unsolicitous of being longer noticed by the family,as Sir Walter considered him unworthy of it:  all acquaintance betweenthem had ceased.
This very awkward history of Mr Elliot was still, after an intervalof several years, felt with anger by Elizabeth, who had liked the manfor himself, and still more for being her father's heir, and whosestrong family pride could see only in him a proper match for Sir WalterElliot's eldest daughter.
There was not a baronet from A to Z whomher feelings could have so willingly acknowledged as an equal.
Yet so miserably had he conducted himself, that though she wasat this present time (the summer of 1814) wearing black ribbonsfor his wife, she could not admit him to be worth thinking of again.
The disgrace of his first marriage might, perhaps, as there wasno reason to suppose it perpetuated by offspring, have been got over,had he not done worse; but he had, as by the accustomary interventionof kind friends, they had been informed, spoken most disrespectfullyof them all, most slightingly and contemptuously of the very bloodhe belonged to, and the honours which were hereafter to be his own.
This could not be pardoned.
Such were Elizabeth Elliot's sentiments and sensations; such the caresto alloy, the agitations to vary, the sameness and the elegance,the prosperity and the nothingness of her scene of life;such the feelings to give interest to a long, uneventful residencein one country circle, to fill the vacancies which there were no habitsof utility abroad, no talents or accomplishments for home, to occupy.
But now, another occupation and solicitude of mind was beginning to beadded to these.
Her father was growing distressed for money.
She knew, that when he now took up the Baronetage, it was to drivethe heavy bills of his tradespeople, and the unwelcome hints ofMr Shepherd, his agent, from his thoughts.
The Kellynch property was good,but not equal to Sir Walter's apprehension of the state requiredin its possessor.
While Lady Elliot lived, there had been method,moderation, and economy, which had just kept him within his income;but with her had died all such right-mindedness, and from that periodhe had been constantly exceeding it.
It had not been possiblefor him to spend less; he had done nothing but what Sir Walter Elliotwas imperiously called on to do; but blameless as he was, he wasnot only growing dreadfully in debt, but was hearing of it so often,that it became vain to attempt concealing it longer, even partially,from his daughter.
He had given her some hints of it the last springin town; he had gone so far even as to say, "Can we retrench?
Does it occur to you that there is any one article in whichwe can retrench?"
and Elizabeth, to do her justice, had, in the firstardour of female alarm, set seriously to think what could be done,and had finally proposed these two branches of economy, to cut offsome unnecessary charities, and to refrain from new furnishingthe drawing-room; to which expedients she afterwards addedthe happy thought of their taking no present down to Anne,as had been the usual yearly custom.
But these measures,however good in themselves, were insufficient for the real extentof the evil, the whole of which Sir Walter found himself obligedto confess to her soon afterwards.
Elizabeth had nothing to proposeof deeper efficacy.
She felt herself ill-used and unfortunate,as did her father; and they were neither of them able to deviseany means of lessening their expenses without compromising their dignity,or relinquishing their comforts in a way not to be borne.
There was only a small part of his estate that Sir Walter could dispose of;but had every acre been alienable, it would have made no difference.
He had condescended to mortgage as far as he had the power,but he would never condescend to sell.
No; he would never disgracehis name so far.
The Kellynch estate should be transmitted wholeand entire, as he had received it.
Their two confidential friends, Mr Shepherd, who lived inthe neighbouring market town, and Lady Russell, were called to advise them;and both father and daughter seemed to expect that something should bestruck out by one or the other to remove their embarrassmentsand reduce their expenditure, without involving the loss ofany indulgence of taste or pride.
Chapter 2Mr Shepherd, a civil, cautious lawyer, who, whatever might be his holdor his views on Sir Walter, would rather have the disagreeableprompted by anybody else, excused himself from offering the slightest hint,and only begged leave to recommend an implicit reference tothe excellent judgement of Lady Russell, from whose known good sensehe fully expected to have just such resolute measures advised ashe meant to see finally adopted.
Lady Russell was most anxiously zealous on the subject, and gave itmuch serious consideration.
She was a woman rather of sound than ofquick abilities, whose difficulties in coming to any decisionin this instance were great, from the opposition of two leading principles.
She was of strict integrity herself, with a delicate sense of honour;but she was as desirous of saving Sir Walter's feelings, as solicitousfor the credit of the family, as aristocratic in her ideas of whatwas due to them, as anybody of sense and honesty could well be.
She was a benevolent, charitable, good woman, and capable ofstrong attachments, most correct in her conduct, strict in her notionsof decorum, and with manners that were held a standard of good-breeding.
She had a cultivated mind, and was, generally speaking,rational and consistent; but she had prejudices on the side of ancestry;she had a value for rank and consequence, which blinded her a littleto the faults of those who possessed them.
Herself the widow ofonly a knight, she gave the dignity of a baronet all its due;and Sir Walter, independent of his claims as an old acquaintance,an attentive neighbour, an obliging landlord, the husband of hervery dear friend, the father of Anne and her sisters, was,as being Sir Walter, in her apprehension, entitled to a great dealof compassion and consideration under his present difficulties.
They must retrench; that did not admit of a doubt.
But she wasvery anxious to have it done with the least possible pain to himand Elizabeth.
She drew up plans of economy, she made exact calculations,and she did what nobody else thought of doing:  she consulted Anne,who never seemed considered by the others as having any interestin the question.
She consulted, and in a degree was influenced by herin marking out the scheme of retrenchment which was at last submittedto Sir Walter.
Every emendation of Anne's had been on the side ofhonesty against importance.
She wanted more vigorous measures,a more complete reformation, a quicker release from debt,a much higher tone of indifference for everything but justice and equity.
"If we can persuade your father to all this," said Lady Russell,looking over her paper, "much may be done.
If he will adoptthese regulations, in seven years he will be clear; and I hopewe may be able to convince him and Elizabeth, that Kellynch Hall hasa respectability in itself which cannot be affected by these reductions;and that the true dignity of Sir Walter Elliot will be very far fromlessened in the eyes of sensible people, by acting like a man of principle.
What will he be doing, in fact, but what very many of our first familieshave done, or ought to do?
There will be nothing singular in his case;and it is singularity which often makes the worst part of our suffering,as it always does of our conduct.
I have great hope of prevailing.
We must be serious and decided; for after all, the person whohas contracted debts must pay them; and though a great deal is due tothe feelings of the gentleman, and the head of a house, like your father,there is still more due to the character of an honest man."
This was the principle on which Anne wanted her father to be proceeding,his friends to be urging him.
She considered it as an actof indispensable duty to clear away the claims of creditors withall the expedition which the most comprehensive retrenchmentscould secure, and saw no dignity in anything short of it.
She wanted it to be prescribed, and felt as a duty.
She ratedLady Russell's influence highly; and as to the severe degreeof self-denial which her own conscience prompted, she believedthere might be little more difficulty in persuading them to a complete,than to half a reformation.
Her knowledge of her fatherand Elizabeth inclined her to think that the sacrifice of one pairof horses would be hardly less painful than of both, and so on,through the whole list of Lady Russell's too gentle reductions.
How Anne's more rigid requisitions might have been takenis of little consequence.
Lady Russell's had no success at all:could not be put up with, were not to be borne.
"What!
every comfortof life knocked off!
Journeys, London, servants, horses, table--contractions and restrictions every where!
To live no longerwith the decencies even of a private gentleman!
No, he would soonerquit Kellynch Hall at once, than remain in it on such disgraceful terms."
"Quit Kellynch Hall."
The hint was immediately taken up by Mr Shepherd,whose interest was involved in the reality of Sir Walter's retrenching,and who was perfectly persuaded that nothing would be done withouta change of abode.
"Since the idea had been started in the very quarterwhich ought to dictate, he had no scruple," he said, "in confessinghis judgement to be entirely on that side.
It did not appear to himthat Sir Walter could materially alter his style of living in a housewhich had such a character of hospitality and ancient dignity to support.
In any other place Sir Walter might judge for himself; and wouldbe looked up to, as regulating the modes of life in whatever wayhe might choose to model his household."
Sir Walter would quit Kellynch Hall; and after a very few days moreof doubt and indecision, the great question of whither he should gowas settled, and the first outline of this important change made out.
There had been three alternatives, London, Bath, or another housein the country.
All Anne's wishes had been for the latter.
A small house in their own neighbourhood, where they might still haveLady Russell's society, still be near Mary, and still have the pleasureof sometimes seeing the lawns and groves of Kellynch, was the objectof her ambition.
But the usual fate of Anne attended her,in having something very opposite from her inclination fixed on.
She disliked Bath, and did not think it agreed with her;and Bath was to be her home.
Sir Walter had at first thought more of London; but Mr Shepherd feltthat he could not be trusted in London, and had been skilful enoughto dissuade him from it, and make Bath preferred.
It was a much saferplace for a gentleman in his predicament:  he might there be importantat comparatively little expense.
Two material advantages of Bathover London had of course been given all their weight:  its more convenientdistance from Kellynch, only fifty miles, and Lady Russell's spendingsome part of every winter there; and to the very great satisfactionof Lady Russell, whose first views on the projected change had beenfor Bath, Sir Walter and Elizabeth were induced to believe thatthey should lose neither consequence nor enjoyment by settling there.
Lady Russell felt obliged to oppose her dear Anne's known wishes.
It would be too much to expect Sir Walter to descend into a small housein his own neighbourhood.
Anne herself would have foundthe mortifications of it more than she foresaw, and to Sir Walter'sfeelings they must have been dreadful.
And with regard to Anne'sdislike of Bath, she considered it as a prejudice and mistake arising,first, from the circumstance of her having been three yearsat school there, after her mother's death; and secondly,from her happening to be not in perfectly good spirits the only winterwhich she had afterwards spent there with herself.
Lady Russell was fond of Bath, in short, and disposed to thinkit must suit them all; and as to her young friend's health,by passing all the warm months with her at Kellynch Lodge,every danger would be avoided; and it was in fact, a change which mustdo both health and spirits good.
Anne had been too little from home,too little seen.
Her spirits were not high.
A larger societywould improve them.
She wanted her to be more known.
The undesirableness of any other house in the same neighbourhoodfor Sir Walter was certainly much strengthened by one part,and a very material part of the scheme, which had been happilyengrafted on the beginning.
He was not only to quit his home,but to see it in the hands of others; a trial of fortitude,which stronger heads than Sir Walter's have found too much.
Kellynch Hall was to be let.
This, however, was a profound secret,not to be breathed beyond their own circle.
Sir Walter could not have borne the degradation of being knownto design letting his house.
Mr Shepherd had once mentioned the word"advertise," but never dared approach it again.
Sir Walter spurnedthe idea of its being offered in any manner; forbad the slightest hintbeing dropped of his having such an intention; and it was only onthe supposition of his being spontaneously solicited by some mostunexceptionable applicant, on his own terms, and as a great favour,that he would let it at all.
How quick come the reasons for approving what we like!
Lady Russell hadanother excellent one at hand, for being extremely glad that Sir Walterand his family were to remove from the country.
Elizabeth had beenlately forming an intimacy, which she wished to see interrupted.
It was with the daughter of Mr Shepherd, who had returned,after an unprosperous marriage, to her father's house, withthe additional burden of two children.
She was a clever young woman,who understood the art of pleasing--the art of pleasing, at least,at Kellynch Hall; and who had made herself so acceptable to Miss Elliot,as to have been already staying there more than once, in spite of allthat Lady Russell, who thought it a friendship quite out of place,could hint of caution and reserve.
Lady Russell, indeed, had scarcely any influence with Elizabeth,and seemed to love her, rather because she would love her,than because Elizabeth deserved it.
She had never received from her morethan outward attention, nothing beyond the observances of complaisance;had never succeeded in any point which she wanted to carry,against previous inclination.
She had been repeatedly very earnestin trying to get Anne included in the visit to London, sensibly opento all the injustice and all the discredit of the selfish arrangementswhich shut her out, and on many lesser occasions had endeavouredto give Elizabeth the advantage of her own better judgement and experience;but always in vain:  Elizabeth would go her own way; and never had shepursued it in more decided opposition to Lady Russell than inthis selection of Mrs Clay; turning from the society of so deservinga sister, to bestow her affection and confidence on one who oughtto have been nothing to her but the object of distant civility.
From situation, Mrs Clay was, in Lady Russell's estimate, a very unequal,and in her character she believed a very dangerous companion;and a removal that would leave Mrs Clay behind, and bring a choiceof more suitable intimates within Miss Elliot's reach, was thereforean object of first-rate importance.
Chapter 3"I must take leave to observe, Sir Walter," said Mr Shepherdone morning at Kellynch Hall, as he laid down the newspaper,"that the present juncture is much in our favour.
This peace willbe turning all our rich naval officers ashore.
They will beall wanting a home.
Could not be a better time, Sir Walter,for having a choice of tenants, very responsible tenants.
Many a noble fortune has been made during the war.
If a rich admiralwere to come in our way, Sir Walter--""He would be a very lucky man, Shepherd," replied Sir Walter;"that's all I have to remark.
A prize indeed would Kellynch Hallbe to him; rather the greatest prize of all, let him have takenever so many before; hey, Shepherd?"
Mr Shepherd laughed, as he knew he must, at this wit, and then added--"I presume to observe, Sir Walter, that, in the way of business,gentlemen of the navy are well to deal with.
I have had a little knowledgeof their methods of doing business; and I am free to confess that theyhave very liberal notions, and are as likely to make desirable tenantsas any set of people one should meet with.
Therefore, Sir Walter,what I would take leave to suggest is, that if in consequence ofany rumours getting abroad of your intention; which must be contemplatedas a possible thing, because we know how difficult it is to keepthe actions and designs of one part of the world from the noticeand curiosity of the other; consequence has its tax; I, John Shepherd,might conceal any family-matters that I chose, for nobody would think itworth their while to observe me; but Sir Walter Elliot has eyes upon himwhich it may be very difficult to elude; and therefore, thus muchI venture upon, that it will not greatly surprise me if,with all our caution, some rumour of the truth should get abroad;in the supposition of which, as I was going to observe, since applicationswill unquestionably follow, I should think any from our wealthynaval commanders particularly worth attending to; and beg leave to add,that two hours will bring me over at any time, to save youthe trouble of replying."
Sir Walter only nodded.
But soon afterwards, rising and pacing the room,he observed sarcastically--"There are few among the gentlemen of the navy, I imagine, who wouldnot be surprised to find themselves in a house of this description."
"They would look around them, no doubt, and bless their good fortune,"said Mrs Clay, for Mrs Clay was present:  her father had driven her over,nothing being of so much use to Mrs Clay's health as a drive to Kellynch:"but I quite agree with my father in thinking a sailor might bea very desirable tenant.
I have known a good deal of the profession;and besides their liberality, they are so neat and carefulin all their ways!
These valuable pictures of yours, Sir Walter,if you chose to leave them, would be perfectly safe.
Everything inand about the house would be taken such excellent care of!
The gardens and shrubberies would be kept in almost as high orderas they are now.
You need not be afraid, Miss Elliot, of your ownsweet flower gardens being neglected."
"As to all that," rejoined Sir Walter coolly, "supposing I were inducedto let my house, I have by no means made up my mind as to the privilegesto be annexed to it.
I am not particularly disposed to favour a tenant.
The park would be open to him of course, and few navy officers,or men of any other description, can have had such a range;but what restrictions I might impose on the use of the pleasure-grounds,is another thing.
I am not fond of the idea of my shrubberies beingalways approachable; and I should recommend Miss Elliot to be on her guardwith respect to her flower garden.
I am very little disposedto grant a tenant of Kellynch Hall any extraordinary favour,I assure you, be he sailor or soldier."
After a short pause, Mr Shepherd presumed to say--"In all these cases, there are established usages whichmake everything plain and easy between landlord and tenant.
Your interest, Sir Walter, is in pretty safe hands.
Depend upon mefor taking care that no tenant has more than his just rights.
I venture to hint, that Sir Walter Elliot cannot be half so jealousfor his own, as John Shepherd will be for him."
Here Anne spoke--"The navy, I think, who have done so much for us, have at leastan equal claim with any other set of men, for all the comforts andall the privileges which any home can give.
Sailors work hard enoughfor their comforts, we must all allow."
"Very true, very true.
What Miss Anne says, is very true,"was Mr Shepherd's rejoinder, and "Oh!
certainly," was his daughter's;but Sir Walter's remark was, soon afterwards--"The profession has its utility, but I should be sorry to seeany friend of mine belonging to it."
"Indeed!"
was the reply, and with a look of surprise.
"Yes; it is in two points offensive to me; I have two strong groundsof objection to it.
First, as being the means of bringing personsof obscure birth into undue distinction, and raising men to honourswhich their fathers and grandfathers never dreamt of; and secondly,as it cuts up a man's youth and vigour most horribly; a sailor grows oldsooner than any other man.
I have observed it all my life.
A man is in greater danger in the navy of being insulted by the riseof one whose father, his father might have disdained to speak to,and of becoming prematurely an object of disgust himself, than inany other line.
One day last spring, in town, I was in companywith two men, striking instances of what I am talking of;Lord St Ives, whose father we all know to have been a country curate,without bread to eat; I was to give place to Lord St Ives,and a certain Admiral Baldwin, the most deplorable-looking personageyou can imagine; his face the colour of mahogany, rough and ruggedto the last degree; all lines and wrinkles, nine grey hairs of a side,and nothing but a dab of powder at top.
`In the name of heaven,who is that old fellow?'
said I to a friend of mine who was standing near,(Sir Basil Morley).
`Old fellow!'
cried Sir Basil, `it is Admiral Baldwin.
What do you take his age to be?'
`Sixty,' said I, `or perhaps sixty-two.'
`Forty,' replied Sir Basil, `forty, and no more.'
Picture to yourselvesmy amazement; I shall not easily forget Admiral Baldwin.
I never saw quite so wretched an example of what a sea-faring life can do;but to a degree, I know it is the same with them all:  they are allknocked about, and exposed to every climate, and every weather,till they are not fit to be seen.
It is a pity they are not knockedon the head at once, before they reach Admiral Baldwin's age."
"Nay, Sir Walter," cried Mrs Clay, "this is being severe indeed.
Have a little mercy on the poor men.
We are not all born to be handsome.
The sea is no beautifier, certainly; sailors do grow old betimes;I have observed it; they soon lose the look of youth.
But then,is not it the same with many other professions, perhaps most other?
Soldiers, in active service, are not at all better off:  and even inthe quieter professions, there is a toil and a labour of the mind,if not of the body, which seldom leaves a man's looks to the naturaleffect of time.
The lawyer plods, quite care-worn; the physicianis up at all hours, and travelling in all weather; and eventhe clergyman--" she stopt a moment to consider what mightdo for the clergyman;--"and even the clergyman, you know is obligedto go into infected rooms, and expose his health and looks toall the injury of a poisonous atmosphere.
In fact, as I havelong been convinced, though every profession is necessary and honourablein its turn, it is only the lot of those who are not obliged to follow any,who can live in a regular way, in the country, choosing their own hours,following their own pursuits, and living on their own property,without the torment of trying for more; it is only their lot, I say,to hold the blessings of health and a good appearance to the utmost:I know no other set of men but what lose something of their personablenesswhen they cease to be quite young."
It seemed as if Mr Shepherd, in this anxiety to bespeakSir Walter's good will towards a naval officer as tenant,had been gifted with foresight; for the very first applicationfor the house was from an Admiral Croft, with whom he shortly afterwardsfell into company in attending the quarter sessions at Taunton; and indeed,he had received a hint of the Admiral from a London correspondent.
By the report which he hastened over to Kellynch to make,Admiral Croft was a native of Somersetshire, who having acquireda very handsome fortune, was wishing to settle in his own country,and had come down to Taunton in order to look at some advertised placesin that immediate neighbourhood, which, however, had not suited him;that accidentally hearing--(it was just as he had foretold,Mr Shepherd observed, Sir Walter's concerns could not be kept a secret,)--accidentally hearing of the possibility of Kellynch Hall being to let,and understanding his (Mr Shepherd's) connection with the owner,he had introduced himself to him in order to make particular inquiries,and had, in the course of a pretty long conference, expressed as strongan inclination for the place as a man who knew it only by descriptioncould feel; and given Mr Shepherd, in his explicit account of himself,every proof of his being a most responsible, eligible tenant.
"And who is Admiral Croft?"
was Sir Walter's cold suspicious inquiry.
Mr Shepherd answered for his being of a gentleman's family,and mentioned a place; and Anne, after the little pause which followed,added--"He is a rear admiral of the white.
He was in the Trafalgar action,and has been in the East Indies since; he was stationed there,I believe, several years."
"Then I take it for granted," observed Sir Walter, "that his faceis about as orange as the cuffs and capes of my livery."
Mr Shepherd hastened to assure him, that Admiral Croft was a very hale,hearty, well-looking man, a little weather-beaten, to be sure,but not much, and quite the gentleman in all his notions and behaviour;not likely to make the smallest difficulty about terms, only wanteda comfortable home, and to get into it as soon as possible;knew he must pay for his convenience; knew what rent a ready-furnishedhouse of that consequence might fetch; should not have been surprisedif Sir Walter had asked more; had inquired about the manor;would be glad of the deputation, certainly, but made no great point of it;said he sometimes took out a gun, but never killed; quite the gentleman.
Mr Shepherd was eloquent on the subject; pointing out allthe circumstances of the Admiral's family, which made himpeculiarly desirable as a tenant.
He was a married man,and without children; the very state to be wished for.
A house wasnever taken good care of, Mr Shepherd observed, without a lady:he did not know, whether furniture might not be in danger of sufferingas much where there was no lady, as where there were many children.
A lady, without a family, was the very best preserver of furniturein the world.
He had seen Mrs Croft, too; she was at Tauntonwith the admiral, and had been present almost all the time they weretalking the matter over.
"And a very well-spoken, genteel, shrewd lady, she seemed to be,"continued he; "asked more questions about the house, and terms,and taxes, than the Admiral himself, and seemed more conversantwith business; and moreover, Sir Walter, I found she was not quiteunconnected in this country, any more than her husband; that is to say,she is sister to a gentleman who did live amongst us once;she told me so herself:  sister to the gentleman who liveda few years back at Monkford.
Bless me!
what was his name?
At this moment I cannot recollect his name, though I have heard it so lately.
Penelope, my dear, can you help me to the name of the gentlemanwho lived at Monkford:  Mrs Croft's brother?"
But Mrs Clay was talking so eagerly with Miss Elliot, that she did nothear the appeal.
"I have no conception whom you can mean, Shepherd; I rememberno gentleman resident at Monkford since the time of old Governor Trent."
"Bless me!
how very odd!
I shall forget my own name soon, I suppose.
A name that I am so very well acquainted with; knew the gentlemanso well by sight; seen him a hundred times; came to consult me once,I remember, about a trespass of one of his neighbours; farmer's manbreaking into his orchard; wall torn down; apples stolen;caught in the fact; and afterwards, contrary to my judgement,submitted to an amicable compromise.
Very odd indeed!"
After waiting another moment--"You mean Mr Wentworth, I suppose?"
said Anne.
Mr Shepherd was all gratitude.
"Wentworth was the very name!
Mr Wentworth was the very man.
He had the curacy of Monkford, you know, Sir Walter, some time back,for two or three years.
Came there about the year ---5, I take it.
You remember him, I am sure."
"Wentworth?
Oh!
ay,--Mr Wentworth, the curate of Monkford.
You misled me by the term gentleman.
I thought you were speaking ofsome man of property:  Mr Wentworth was nobody, I remember;quite unconnected; nothing to do with the Strafford family.
One wonders how the names of many of our nobility become so common."
As Mr Shepherd perceived that this connexion of the Crofts did themno service with Sir Walter, he mentioned it no more; returning,with all his zeal, to dwell on the circumstances more indisputablyin their favour; their age, and number, and fortune; the high ideathey had formed of Kellynch Hall, and extreme solicitude forthe advantage of renting it; making it appear as if they rankednothing beyond the happiness of being the tenants of Sir Walter Elliot:an extraordinary taste, certainly, could they have been supposed inthe secret of Sir Walter's estimate of the dues of a tenant.
It succeeded, however; and though Sir Walter must ever look withan evil eye on anyone intending to inhabit that house, and think theminfinitely too well off in being permitted to rent it on the highest terms,he was talked into allowing Mr Shepherd to proceed in the treaty,and authorising him to wait on Admiral Croft, who still remainedat Taunton, and fix a day for the house being seen.
Sir Walter was not very wise; but still he had experience enoughof the world to feel, that a more unobjectionable tenant,in all essentials, than Admiral Croft bid fair to be, could hardly offer.
So far went his understanding; and his vanity supplied a littleadditional soothing, in the Admiral's situation in life, which was justhigh enough, and not too high.
"I have let my house to Admiral Croft,"would sound extremely well; very much better than to any mere Mr--;a Mr (save, perhaps, some half dozen in the nation,) always needsa note of explanation.
An admiral speaks his own consequence,and, at the same time, can never make a baronet look small.
In all their dealings and intercourse, Sir Walter Elliot must everhave the precedence.
Nothing could be done without a reference to Elizabeth:but her inclination was growing so strong for a removal,that she was happy to have it fixed and expedited by a tenant at hand;and not a word to suspend decision was uttered by her.
Mr Shepherd was completely empowered to act; and no sooner hadsuch an end been reached, than Anne, who had been a most attentive listenerto the whole, left the room, to seek the comfort of cool air for herflushed cheeks; and as she walked along a favourite grove, said,with a gentle sigh, "A few months more, and he, perhaps,may be walking here."
Chapter 4He was not Mr Wentworth, the former curate of Monkford,however suspicious appearances may be, but a Captain Frederick Wentworth,his brother, who being made commander in consequence of the actionoff St Domingo, and not immediately employed, had come into Somersetshire,in the summer of 1806; and having no parent living, found a homefor half a year at Monkford.
He was, at that time, a remarkably fineyoung man, with a great deal of intelligence, spirit, and brilliancy;and Anne an extremely pretty girl, with gentleness, modesty, taste,and feeling.
Half the sum of attraction, on either side, might havebeen enough, for he had nothing to do, and she had hardly anybody to love;but the encounter of such lavish recommendations could not fail.
They were gradually acquainted, and when acquainted, rapidly anddeeply in love.
It would be difficult to say which had seenhighest perfection in the other, or which had been the happiest:she, in receiving his declarations and proposals, or he inhaving them accepted.
A short period of exquisite felicity followed, and but a short one.
Troubles soon arose.
Sir Walter, on being applied to, without actuallywithholding his consent, or saying it should never be, gave it allthe negative of great astonishment, great coldness, great silence,and a professed resolution of doing nothing for his daughter.
He thought it a very degrading alliance; and Lady Russell, though withmore tempered and pardonable pride, received it as a most unfortunate one.
Anne Elliot, with all her claims of birth, beauty, and mind,to throw herself away at nineteen; involve herself at nineteenin an engagement with a young man, who had nothing but himselfto recommend him, and no hopes of attaining affluence, but in the chancesof a most uncertain profession, and no connexions to secureeven his farther rise in the profession, would be, indeed, a throwing away,which she grieved to think of!
Anne Elliot, so young; known to so few,to be snatched off by a stranger without alliance or fortune;or rather sunk by him into a state of most wearing, anxious,youth-killing dependence!
It must not be, if by any fair interferenceof friendship, any representations from one who had almost a mother's love,and mother's rights, it would be prevented.
Captain Wentworth had no fortune.
He had been lucky in his profession;but spending freely, what had come freely, had realized nothing.
But he was confident that he should soon be rich:full of life and ardour, he knew that he should soon have a ship,and soon be on a station that would lead to everything he wanted.
He had always been lucky; he knew he should be so still.
Such confidence, powerful in its own warmth, and bewitching inthe wit which often expressed it, must have been enough for Anne;but Lady Russell saw it very differently.
His sanguine temper,and fearlessness of mind, operated very differently on her.
She saw in it but an aggravation of the evil.
It only added adangerous character to himself.
He was brilliant, he was headstrong.
Lady Russell had little taste for wit, and of anything approachingto imprudence a horror.
She deprecated the connexion in every light.
Such opposition, as these feelings produced, was more thanAnne could combat.
Young and gentle as she was, it might yethave been possible to withstand her father's ill-will,though unsoftened by one kind word or look on the part of her sister;but Lady Russell, whom she had always loved and relied on, could not,with such steadiness of opinion, and such tenderness of manner,be continually advising her in vain.
She was persuaded to believethe engagement a wrong thing:  indiscreet, improper, hardly capableof success, and not deserving it.
But it was not a merely selfish caution,under which she acted, in putting an end to it.
Had she notimagined herself consulting his good, even more than her own,she could hardly have given him up.
The belief of being prudent,and self-denying, principally for his advantage, was her chief consolation,under the misery of a parting, a final parting; and every consolationwas required, for she had to encounter all the additional pain of opinions,on his side, totally unconvinced and unbending, and of his feeling himselfill used by so forced a relinquishment.
He had left the countryin consequence.
A few months had seen the beginning and the end of their acquaintance;but not with a few months ended Anne's share of suffering from it.
Her attachment and regrets had, for a long time, clouded everyenjoyment of youth, and an early loss of bloom and spiritshad been their lasting effect.
More than seven years were gone since this little historyof sorrowful interest had reached its close; and time hadsoftened down much, perhaps nearly all of peculiar attachment to him,but she had been too dependent on time alone; no aid had been givenin change of place (except in one visit to Bath soon after the rupture),or in any novelty or enlargement of society.
No one had evercome within the Kellynch circle, who could bear a comparison withFrederick Wentworth, as he stood in her memory.
No second attachment,the only thoroughly natural, happy, and sufficient cure,at her time of life, had been possible to the nice tone of her mind,the fastidiousness of her taste, in the small limits of the societyaround them.
She had been solicited, when about two-and-twenty,to change her name, by the young man, who not long afterwards founda more willing mind in her younger sister; and Lady Russell hadlamented her refusal; for Charles Musgrove was the eldest son of a man,whose landed property and general importance were second in that country,only to Sir Walter's, and of good character and appearance;and however Lady Russell might have asked yet for something more,while Anne was nineteen, she would have rejoiced to see her at twenty-twoso respectably removed from the partialities and injustice ofher father's house, and settled so permanently near herself.
But in this case, Anne had left nothing for advice to do;and though Lady Russell, as satisfied as ever with her own discretion,never wished the past undone, she began now to have the anxietywhich borders on hopelessness for Anne's being tempted, by some manof talents and independence, to enter a state for which she held herto be peculiarly fitted by her warm affections and domestic habits.
They knew not each other's opinion, either its constancy or its change,on the one leading point of Anne's conduct, for the subject was neveralluded to; but Anne, at seven-and-twenty, thought very differentlyfrom what she had been made to think at nineteen.
She did not blameLady Russell, she did not blame herself for having been guided by her;but she felt that were any young person, in similar circumstances,to apply to her for counsel, they would never receive any of suchcertain immediate wretchedness, such uncertain future good.
She was persuaded that under every disadvantage of disapprobation at home,and every anxiety attending his profession, all their probable fears,delays, and disappointments, she should yet have been a happier womanin maintaining the engagement, than she had been in the sacrifice of it;and this, she fully believed, had the usual share, had even more thanthe usual share of all such solicitudes and suspense been theirs,without reference to the actual results of their case, which,as it happened, would have bestowed earlier prosperity thancould be reasonably calculated on.
All his sanguine expectations,all his confidence had been justified.
His genius and ardourhad seemed to foresee and to command his prosperous path.
He had, very soon after their engagement ceased, got employ:and all that he had told her would follow, had taken place.
He had distinguished himself, and early gained the other step in rank,and must now, by successive captures, have made a handsome fortune.
She had only navy lists and newspapers for her authority,but she could not doubt his being rich; and, in favour of his constancy,she had no reason to believe him married.
How eloquent could Anne Elliot have been!
how eloquent, at least,were her wishes on the side of early warm attachment, and a cheerfulconfidence in futurity, against that over-anxious caution whichseems to insult exertion and distrust Providence!
She had been forcedinto prudence in her youth, she learned romance as she grew older:the natural sequel of an unnatural beginning.
With all these circumstances, recollections and feelings,she could not hear that Captain Wentworth's sister was likelyto live at Kellynch without a revival of former pain; and many a stroll,and many a sigh, were necessary to dispel the agitation of the idea.
She often told herself it was folly, before she could harden her nervessufficiently to feel the continual discussion of the Croftsand their business no evil.
She was assisted, however, by thatperfect indifference and apparent unconsciousness, among the only threeof her own friends in the secret of the past, which seemed almost to denyany recollection of it.
She could do justice to the superiorityof Lady Russell's motives in this, over those of her father and Elizabeth;she could honour all the better feelings of her calmness;but the general air of oblivion among them was highly importantfrom whatever it sprung; and in the event of Admiral Croft's reallytaking Kellynch Hall, she rejoiced anew over the conviction whichhad always been most grateful to her, of the past being known tothose three only among her connexions, by whom no syllable,she believed, would ever be whispered, and in the trust that among his,the brother only with whom he had been residing, had receivedany information of their short-lived engagement.
That brother had beenlong removed from the country and being a sensible man, and, moreover,a single man at the time, she had a fond dependence on no human creature'shaving heard of it from him.
The sister, Mrs Croft, had then been out of England, accompanyingher husband on a foreign station, and her own sister, Mary,had been at school while it all occurred; and never admitted bythe pride of some, and the delicacy of others, to the smallest knowledgeof it afterwards.
With these supports, she hoped that the acquaintance between herselfand the Crofts, which, with Lady Russell, still resident in Kellynch,and Mary fixed only three miles off, must be anticipated,need not involve any particular awkwardness.
Chapter 5On the morning appointed for Admiral and Mrs Croft's seeing Kellynch Hall,Anne found it most natural to take her almost daily walk to Lady Russell's,and keep out of the way till all was over; when she found it most naturalto be sorry that she had missed the opportunity of seeing them.
This meeting of the two parties proved highly satisfactory,and decided the whole business at once.
Each lady was previouslywell disposed for an agreement, and saw nothing, therefore,but good manners in the other; and with regard to the gentlemen,there was such an hearty good humour, such an open, trusting liberalityon the Admiral's side, as could not but influence Sir Walter,who had besides been flattered into his very best and most polishedbehaviour by Mr Shepherd's assurances of his being known, by report,to the Admiral, as a model of good breeding.
The house and grounds, and furniture, were approved, the Croftswere approved, terms, time, every thing, and every body, was right;and Mr Shepherd's clerks were set to work, without there having beena single preliminary difference to modify of all that"This indenture sheweth."
Sir Walter, without hesitation, declared the Admiral to bethe best-looking sailor he had ever met with, and went so far as to say,that if his own man might have had the arranging of his hair,he should not be ashamed of being seen with him any where;and the Admiral, with sympathetic cordiality, observed to his wifeas they drove back through the park, "I thought we should sooncome to a deal, my dear, in spite of what they told us at Taunton.
The Baronet will never set the Thames on fire, but there seems to beno harm in him."
reciprocal compliments, which would have beenesteemed about equal.
The Crofts were to have possession at Michaelmas; and as Sir Walterproposed removing to Bath in the course of the preceding month,there was no time to be lost in making every dependent arrangement.
Lady Russell, convinced that Anne would not be allowed to be of any use,or any importance, in the choice of the house which they weregoing to secure, was very unwilling to have her hurried away so soon,and wanted to make it possible for her to stay behind till she mightconvey her to Bath herself after Christmas; but having engagementsof her own which must take her from Kellynch for several weeks,she was unable to give the full invitation she wished, and Annethough dreading the possible heats of September in all the white glareof Bath, and grieving to forego all the influence so sweet and so sadof the autumnal months in the country, did not think that,everything considered, she wished to remain.
It would be most right,and most wise, and, therefore must involve least sufferingto go with the others.
Something occurred, however, to give her a different duty.
Mary, often a little unwell, and always thinking a great dealof her own complaints, and always in the habit of claiming Annewhen anything was the matter, was indisposed; and foreseeingthat she should not have a day's health all the autumn, entreated,or rather required her, for it was hardly entreaty, to come toUppercross Cottage, and bear her company as long as she should want her,instead of going to Bath.
"I cannot possibly do without Anne," was Mary's reasoning;and Elizabeth's reply was, "Then I am sure Anne had better stay,for nobody will want her in Bath."
To be claimed as a good, though in an improper style, is at leastbetter than being rejected as no good at all; and Anne, glad tobe thought of some use, glad to have anything marked out as a duty,and certainly not sorry to have the scene of it in the country,and her own dear country, readily agreed to stay.
This invitation of Mary's removed all Lady Russell's difficulties,and it was consequently soon settled that Anne should not go to Bathtill Lady Russell took her, and that all the intervening timeshould be divided between Uppercross Cottage and Kellynch Lodge.
So far all was perfectly right; but Lady Russell was almost startledby the wrong of one part of the Kellynch Hall plan, when it burst on her,which was, Mrs Clay's being engaged to go to Bath with Sir Walterand Elizabeth, as a most important and valuable assistant to the latterin all the business before her.
Lady Russell was extremely sorrythat such a measure should have been resorted to at all, wondered,grieved, and feared; and the affront it contained to Anne,in Mrs Clay's being of so much use, while Anne could be of none,was a very sore aggravation.
Anne herself was become hardened to such affronts; but she feltthe imprudence of the arrangement quite as keenly as Lady Russell.
With a great deal of quiet observation, and a knowledge,which she often wished less, of her father's character, she wassensible that results the most serious to his family from the intimacywere more than possible.
She did not imagine that her fatherhad at present an idea of the kind.
Mrs Clay had freckles,and a projecting tooth, and a clumsy wrist, which he was continuallymaking severe remarks upon, in her absence; but she was young,and certainly altogether well-looking, and possessed, in an acute mindand assiduous pleasing manners, infinitely more dangerous attractionsthan any merely personal might have been.
Anne was so impressedby the degree of their danger, that she could not excuse herselffrom trying to make it perceptible to her sister.
She had little hopeof success; but Elizabeth, who in the event of such a reverse would beso much more to be pitied than herself, should never, she thought,have reason to reproach her for giving no warning.
She spoke, and seemed only to offend.
Elizabeth could not conceivehow such an absurd suspicion should occur to her, and indignantlyanswered for each party's perfectly knowing their situation.
"Mrs Clay," said she, warmly, "never forgets who she is;and as I am rather better acquainted with her sentiments than you can be,I can assure you, that upon the subject of marriage they areparticularly nice, and that she reprobates all inequality of conditionand rank more strongly than most people.
And as to my father,I really should not have thought that he, who has kept himself singleso long for our sakes, need be suspected now.
If Mrs Clay werea very beautiful woman, I grant you, it might be wrong to have herso much with me; not that anything in the world, I am sure,would induce my father to make a degrading match, but he mightbe rendered unhappy.
But poor Mrs Clay who, with all her merits,can never have been reckoned tolerably pretty, I really think poorMrs Clay may be staying here in perfect safety.
One would imagineyou had never heard my father speak of her personal misfortunes,though I know you must fifty times.
That tooth of her'sand those freckles.
Freckles do not disgust me so very muchas they do him.
I have known a face not materially disfigured by a few,but he abominates them.
You must have heard him noticeMrs Clay's freckles."
"There is hardly any personal defect," replied Anne,"which an agreeable manner might not gradually reconcile one to."
"I think very differently," answered Elizabeth, shortly;"an agreeable manner may set off handsome features, but can neveralter plain ones.
However, at any rate, as I have a great deal moreat stake on this point than anybody else can have, I think itrather unnecessary in you to be advising me."
Anne had done; glad that it was over, and not absolutely hopelessof doing good.
Elizabeth, though resenting the suspicion,might yet be made observant by it.
The last office of the four carriage-horses was to draw Sir Walter,Miss Elliot, and Mrs Clay to Bath.
The party drove off in very good spirits;Sir Walter prepared with condescending bows for all the afflictedtenantry and cottagers who might have had a hint to show themselves,and Anne walked up at the same time, in a sort of desolate tranquillity,to the Lodge, where she was to spend the first week.
Her friend was not in better spirits than herself.
Lady Russell felt thisbreak-up of the family exceedingly.
Their respectability wasas dear to her as her own, and a daily intercourse had becomeprecious by habit.
It was painful to look upon their deserted grounds,and still worse to anticipate the new hands they were to fall into;and to escape the solitariness and the melancholy of so altered a village,and be out of the way when Admiral and Mrs Croft first arrived,she had determined to make her own absence from home beginwhen she must give up Anne.
Accordingly their removal was made together,and Anne was set down at Uppercross Cottage, in the first stageof Lady Russell's journey.
Uppercross was a moderate-sized village, which a few years backhad been completely in the old English style, containing onlytwo houses superior in appearance to those of the yeomen and labourers;the mansion of the squire, with its high walls, great gates, and old trees,substantial and unmodernized, and the compact, tight parsonage,enclosed in its own neat garden, with a vine and a pear-treetrained round its casements; but upon the marriage of the young 'squire,it had received the improvement of a farm-house elevated into a cottage,for his residence, and Uppercross Cottage, with its veranda,French windows, and other prettiness, was quite as likely to catchthe traveller's eye as the more consistent and considerable aspectand premises of the Great House, about a quarter of a mile farther on.
Here Anne had often been staying.
She knew the ways of Uppercrossas well as those of Kellynch.
The two families were so continually meeting,so much in the habit of running in and out of each other's houseat all hours, that it was rather a surprise to her to find Mary alone;but being alone, her being unwell and out of spirits was almosta matter of course.
Though better endowed than the elder sister,Mary had not Anne's understanding nor temper.
While well, and happy,and properly attended to, she had great good humour and excellent spirits;but any indisposition sunk her completely.
She had no resourcesfor solitude; and inheriting a considerable share of the Elliotself-importance, was very prone to add to every other distressthat of fancying herself neglected and ill-used.
In person, she wasinferior to both sisters, and had, even in her bloom, only reachedthe dignity of being "a fine girl."
She was now lying on the faded sofaof the pretty little drawing-room, the once elegant furniture of whichhad been gradually growing shabby, under the influence of four summersand two children; and, on Anne's appearing, greeted her with--"So, you are come at last!
I began to think I should never see you.
I am so ill I can hardly speak.
I have not seen a creaturethe whole morning!"
"I am sorry to find you unwell," replied Anne.
"You sent mesuch a good account of yourself on Thursday!"
"Yes, I made the best of it; I always do:  but I was very far from wellat the time; and I do not think I ever was so ill in my lifeas I have been all this morning:  very unfit to be left alone, I am sure.
Suppose I were to be seized of a sudden in some dreadful way,and not able to ring the bell!
So, Lady Russell would not get out.
I do not think she has been in this house three times this summer."
Anne said what was proper, and enquired after her husband.
"Oh!
Charles is out shooting.
I have not seen him since seven o'clock.
He would go, though I told him how ill I was.
He said he should notstay out long; but he has never come back, and now it is almost one.
I assure you, I have not seen a soul this whole long morning."
"You have had your little boys with you?"
"Yes, as long as I could bear their noise; but they are so unmanageablethat they do me more harm than good.
Little Charles does not minda word I say, and Walter is growing quite as bad."
"Well, you will soon be better now," replied Anne, cheerfully.
"You know I always cure you when I come.
How are your neighboursat the Great House?"
"I can give you no account of them.
I have not seen one of them to-day,except Mr Musgrove, who just stopped and spoke through the window,but without getting off his horse; and though I told him how ill I was,not one of them have been near me.
It did not happen to suitthe Miss Musgroves, I suppose, and they never put themselvesout of their way."
"You will see them yet, perhaps, before the morning is gone.
It is early."
"I never want them, I assure you.
They talk and laugh a great dealtoo much for me.
Oh!
Anne, I am so very unwell!
It was quite unkindof you not to come on Thursday."
"My dear Mary, recollect what a comfortable account you sent me of yourself!
You wrote in the cheerfullest manner, and said you were perfectly well,and in no hurry for me; and that being the case, you must be awarethat my wish would be to remain with Lady Russell to the last:and besides what I felt on her account, I have really been so busy,have had so much to do, that I could not very conveniently haveleft Kellynch sooner."
"Dear me!
what can you possibly have to do?"
"A great many things, I assure you.
More than I can recollectin a moment; but I can tell you some.
I have been makinga duplicate of the catalogue of my father's books and pictures.
I have been several times in the garden with Mackenzie,trying to understand, and make him understand, which of Elizabeth's plantsare for Lady Russell.
I have had all my own little concernsto arrange, books and music to divide, and all my trunks to repack,from not having understood in time what was intended as to the waggons:and one thing I have had to do, Mary, of a more trying nature:going to almost every house in the parish, as a sort of take-leave.
I was told that they wished it.
But all these things took upa great deal of time."
"Oh!
well!"
and after a moment's pause, "but you have never asked meone word about our dinner at the Pooles yesterday."
"Did you go then?
I have made no enquiries, because I concludedyou must have been obliged to give up the party."
"Oh yes!
I went.
I was very well yesterday; nothing at allthe matter with me till this morning.
It would have been strangeif I had not gone."
"I am very glad you were well enough, and I hope you had a pleasant party."
"Nothing remarkable.
One always knows beforehand what the dinner will be,and who will be there; and it is so very uncomfortable not havinga carriage of one's own.
Mr and Mrs Musgrove took me, and we wereso crowded!
They are both so very large, and take up so much room;and Mr Musgrove always sits forward.
So, there was I, crowded intothe back seat with Henrietta and Louise; and I think it very likelythat my illness to-day may be owing to it."
A little further perseverance in patience and forced cheerfulnesson Anne's side produced nearly a cure on Mary's.
She could soonsit upright on the sofa, and began to hope she might be ableto leave it by dinner-time.
Then, forgetting to think of it,she was at the other end of the room, beautifying a nosegay;then, she ate her cold meat; and then she was well enoughto propose a little walk.
"Where shall we go?"
said she, when they were ready.
"I supposeyou will not like to call at the Great House before they havebeen to see you?"
"I have not the smallest objection on that account," replied Anne.
"I should never think of standing on such ceremony with people I knowso well as Mrs and the Miss Musgroves."
"Oh!
but they ought to call upon you as soon as possible.
They ought to feel what is due to you as my sister.
However,we may as well go and sit with them a little  while, and when wehave that over, we can enjoy our walk."
Anne had always thought such a style of intercourse highly imprudent;but she had ceased to endeavour to check it, from believing that,though there were on each side continual subjects of offence,neither family could now do without it.
To the Great House accordinglythey went, to sit the full half hour in the old-fashioned square parlour,with a small carpet and shining floor, to which the presentdaughters of the house were gradually giving the proper air of confusionby a grand piano-forte and a harp, flower-stands and little tablesplaced in every direction.
Oh!
could the originals of the portraitsagainst the wainscot, could the gentlemen in brown velvet andthe ladies in blue satin have seen what was going on, have been consciousof such an overthrow of all order and neatness!
The portraits themselvesseemed to be staring in astonishment.
The Musgroves, like their houses, were in a state of alteration,perhaps of improvement.
The father and mother were in the oldEnglish style, and the young people in the new.
Mr and Mrs Musgrovewere a very good sort of people; friendly and hospitable,not much educated, and not at all elegant.
Their children hadmore modern minds and manners.
There was a numerous family;but the only two grown up, excepting Charles, were Henrietta and Louisa,young ladies of nineteen and twenty, who had brought from school at Exeterall the usual stock of accomplishments, and were now like thousandsof other young ladies, living to be fashionable, happy, and merry.
Their dress had every advantage, their faces were rather pretty,their spirits extremely good, their manner unembarrassed and pleasant;they were of consequence at home, and favourites abroad.
Anne always contemplated them as some of the happiest creaturesof her acquaintance; but still, saved as we all are, by somecomfortable feeling of superiority from wishing for the possibilityof exchange, she would not have given up her own more elegantand cultivated mind for all their enjoyments; and envied them nothingbut that seemingly perfect good understanding and agreement together,that good-humoured mutual affection, of which she had knownso little herself with either of her sisters.
They were received with great cordiality.
Nothing seemed amisson the side of the Great House family, which was generally,as Anne very well knew, the least to blame.
The half hour waschatted away pleasantly enough; and she was not at all surprisedat the end of it, to have their walking party joined by boththe Miss Musgroves, at Mary's particular invitation.
Chapter 6Anne had not wanted this visit to Uppercross, to learn that a removalfrom one set of people to another, though at a distance of only three miles,will often include a total change of conversation, opinion, and idea.
She had never been staying there before, without being struck by it,or without wishing that other Elliots could have her advantagein seeing how unknown, or unconsidered there, were the affairswhich at Kellynch Hall were treated as of such general publicityand pervading interest; yet, with all this experience, she believedshe must now submit to feel that another lesson, in the art of knowingour own nothingness beyond our own circle, was become necessary for her;for certainly, coming as she did, with a heart full of the subjectwhich had been completely occupying both houses in Kellynch for many weeks,she had expected rather more curiosity and sympathy than she foundin the separate but very similar remark of Mr and Mrs Musgrove:"So, Miss Anne, Sir Walter and your sister are gone; and what part of Bathdo you think they will settle in?"
and this, without muchwaiting for an answer; or in the young ladies' addition of,"I hope we shall be in Bath in the winter; but remember, papa,if we do go, we must be in a good situation:  none of yourQueen Squares for us!"
or in the anxious supplement from Mary, of--"Upon my word, I shall be pretty well off, when you are all gone awayto be happy at Bath!"
She could only resolve to avoid such self-delusion in future,and think with heightened gratitude of the extraordinary blessingof having one such truly sympathising friend as Lady Russell.
The Mr Musgroves had their own game to guard, and to destroy,their own horses, dogs, and newspapers to engage them, and the femaleswere fully occupied in all the other common subjects of housekeeping,neighbours, dress, dancing, and music.
She acknowledged it to bevery fitting, that every little social commonwealth should dictateits own matters of discourse; and hoped, ere long, to becomea not unworthy member of the one she was now transplanted into.
With the prospect of spending at least two months at Uppercross,it was highly incumbent on her to clothe her imagination, her memory,and all her ideas in as much of Uppercross as possible.
She had no dread of these two months.
Mary was not so repulsiveand unsisterly as Elizabeth, nor so inaccessible to all influence of hers;neither was there anything among the other component partsof the cottage inimical to comfort.
She was always on friendly termswith her brother-in-law; and in the children, who loved her nearly as well,and respected her a great deal more than their mother, she hadan object of interest, amusement, and wholesome exertion.
Charles Musgrove was civil and agreeable; in sense and temper he wasundoubtedly superior to his wife, but not of powers, or conversation,or grace, to make the past, as they were connected together,at all a dangerous contemplation; though, at the same time,Anne could believe, with Lady Russell, that a more equal matchmight have greatly improved him; and that a woman of real understandingmight have given more consequence to his character, and more usefulness,rationality, and elegance to his habits and pursuits.
As it was,he did nothing with much zeal, but sport; and his time was otherwisetrifled away, without benefit from books or anything else.
He had very good spirits, which never seemed much affected byhis wife's occasional lowness, bore with her unreasonablenesssometimes to Anne's admiration, and upon the whole, though there wasvery often a little disagreement (in which she had sometimes more sharethan she wished, being appealed to by both parties), they might passfor a happy couple.
They were always perfectly agreed in the wantof more money, and a strong inclination for a handsome presentfrom his father; but here, as on most topics, he had the superiority,for while Mary thought it a great shame that such a present was not made,he always contended for his father's having many other uses for his money,and a right to spend it as he liked.
As to the management of their children, his theory was much betterthan his wife's, and his practice not so bad.
"I could manage themvery well, if it were not for Mary's interference," was whatAnne often heard him say, and had a good deal of faith in;but when listening in turn to Mary's reproach of "Charles spoilsthe children so that I cannot get them into any order," she never hadthe smallest temptation to say, "Very true."
One of the least agreeable circumstances of her residence therewas her being treated with too much confidence by all parties,and being too much in the secret of the complaints of each house.
Known to have some influence with her sister, she was continually requested,or at least receiving hints to exert it, beyond what was practicable.
"I wish you could persuade Mary not to be always fancying herself ill,"was Charles's language; and, in an unhappy mood, thus spoke Mary:"I do believe if Charles were to see me dying, he would not thinkthere was anything the matter with me.
I am sure, Anne, if you would,you might persuade him that I really am very ill--a great deal worsethan I ever own."
Mary's declaration was, "I hate sending the children to the Great House,though their grandmamma is always wanting to see them, for she humoursand indulges them to such a degree, and gives them so much trashand sweet things, that they are sure to come back sick and crossfor the rest of the day."
And Mrs Musgrove took the first opportunityof being alone with Anne, to say, "Oh!
Miss Anne, I cannot help wishingMrs Charles had a little of your method with those children.
They are quite different creatures with you!
But to be sure,in general they are so spoilt!
It is a pity you cannot put your sisterin the way of managing them.
They are as fine healthy childrenas ever were seen, poor little dears!
without partiality;but Mrs Charles knows no more how they should be treated--!
Bless me!
how troublesome they are sometimes.
I assure you, Miss Anne,it prevents my wishing to see them at our house so often asI otherwise should.
I believe Mrs Charles is not quite pleasedwith my not inviting them oftener; but you know it is very badto have children with one that one is obligated to be checkingevery moment; "don't do this," and "don't do that;"  or that one canonly keep in tolerable order by more cake than is good for them."
She had this communication, moreover, from Mary.
"Mrs Musgrove thinksall her servants so steady, that it would be high treasonto call it in question; but I am sure, without exaggeration,that her upper house-maid and laundry-maid, instead of beingin their business, are gadding about the village, all day long.
I meet them wherever I go; and I declare, I never go twice into my nurserywithout seeing something of them.
If Jemima were not the trustiest,steadiest creature in the world, it would be enough to spoil her;for she tells me, they are always tempting her to take a walk with them."
And on Mrs Musgrove's side, it was, "I make a rule of never interferingin any of my daughter-in-law's concerns, for I know it would not do;but I shall tell you, Miss Anne, because you may be able to set thingsto rights, that I have no very good opinion of Mrs Charles's nursery-maid:I hear strange stories of her; she is always upon the gad; and frommy own knowledge, I can declare, she is such a fine-dressing lady,that she is enough to ruin any servants she comes near.
Mrs Charles quite swears by her, I know; but I just give you this hint,that you may be upon the watch; because, if you see anything amiss,you need not be afraid of mentioning it."
Again, it was Mary's complaint, that Mrs Musgrove was very aptnot to give her the precedence that was her due, when they dinedat the Great House with other families; and she did not see any reasonwhy she was to be considered so much at home as to lose her place.
And one day when Anne was walking with only the Musgroves, one of themafter talking of rank, people of rank, and jealousy of rank, said,"I have no scruple of observing to you, how nonsensical some persons areabout their place, because all the world knows how easy and indifferentyou are about it; but I wish anybody could give Mary a hint thatit would be a great deal better if she were not so very tenacious,especially if she would not be always putting herself forward to takeplace of mamma.
Nobody doubts her right to have precedence of mamma,but it would be more becoming in her not to be always insisting on it.
It is not that mamma cares about it the least in the world,but I know it is taken notice of by many persons."
How was Anne to set all these matters to rights?
She could do little morethan listen patiently, soften every grievance, and excuse eachto the other; give them all hints of the forbearance necessarybetween such near neighbours, and make those hints broadestwhich were meant for her sister's benefit.
In all other respects, her visit began and proceeded very well.
Her own spirits improved by change of place and subject,by being removed three miles from Kellynch; Mary's ailments lessenedby having a constant companion, and their daily intercoursewith the other family, since there was neither superior affection,confidence, nor employment in the cottage, to be interrupted by it,was rather an advantage.
It was certainly carried nearly as far as possible,for they met every morning, and hardly ever spent an evening asunder;but she believed they should not have done so well without the sightof Mr and Mrs Musgrove's respectable forms in the usual places,or without the talking, laughing, and singing of their daughters.
She played a great deal better than either of the Miss Musgroves,but having no voice, no knowledge of the harp, and no fond parents,to sit by and fancy themselves delighted, her performance waslittle thought of, only out of civility, or to refresh the others,as she was well aware.
She knew that when she played she wasgiving pleasure only to herself; but this was no new sensation.
Excepting one short period of her life, she had never, since the ageof fourteen, never since the loss of her dear mother, known the happinessof being listened to, or encouraged by any just appreciation or real taste.
In music she had been always used to feel alone in the world;and Mr and Mrs Musgrove's fond partiality for their own daughters'performance, and total indifference to any other person's,gave her much more pleasure for their sakes, than mortificationfor her own.
The party at the Great House was sometimes increased by other company.
The neighbourhood was not large, but the Musgroves were visitedby everybody, and had more dinner-parties, and more callers,more visitors by invitation and by chance, than any other family.
There were more completely popular.
The girls were wild for dancing; and the evenings ended, occasionally,in an unpremeditated little ball.
There was a family of cousinswithin a walk of Uppercross, in less affluent circumstances,who depended on the Musgroves for all their pleasures:  they would comeat any time, and help play at anything, or dance anywhere; and Anne,very much preferring the office of musician to a more active post,played country dances to them by the hour together; a kindness whichalways recommended her musical powers to the notice of Mr and Mrs Musgrovemore than anything else, and often drew this compliment;--"Well done, Miss Anne!
very well done indeed!
Lord bless me!
how those little fingers of yours fly about!"
So passed the first three weeks.
Michaelmas came; and now Anne's heartmust be in Kellynch again.
A beloved home made over to others;all the precious rooms and furniture, groves, and prospects,beginning to own other eyes and other limbs!
She could notthink of much else on the 29th of September; and she had thissympathetic touch in the evening from Mary, who, on having occasionto note down the day of the month, exclaimed, "Dear me, is not thisthe day the Crofts were to come to Kellynch?
I am glad I did notthink of it before.
How low it makes me!"
The Crofts took possession with true naval alertness, and wereto be visited.
Mary deplored the necessity for herself.
"Nobody knew how much she should suffer.
She should put it offas long as she could;" but was not easy till she had talked Charlesinto driving her over on an early day, and was in a very animated,comfortable state of imaginary agitation, when she came back.
Anne had very sincerely rejoiced in there being no means of her going.
She wished, however to see the Crofts, and was glad to be withinwhen the visit was returned.
They came:  the master of the housewas not at home, but the two sisters were together; and as it chancedthat Mrs Croft fell to the share of Anne, while the Admiral sat by Mary,and made himself very agreeable by his good-humoured noticeof her little boys, she was well able to watch for a likeness,and if it failed her in the features, to catch it in the voice,or in the turn of sentiment and expression.
Mrs Croft, though neither tall nor fat, had a squareness,uprightness, and vigour of form, which gave importance to her person.
She had bright dark eyes, good teeth, and altogether an agreeable face;though her reddened and weather-beaten complexion, the consequenceof her having been almost as much at sea as her husband, made her seem tohave lived some years longer in the world than her real eight-and-thirty.
Her manners were open, easy, and decided, like one who hadno distrust of herself, and no doubts of what to do; without anyapproach to coarseness, however, or any want of good humour.
Anne gave her credit, indeed, for feelings of great considerationtowards herself, in all that related to Kellynch, and it pleased her:especially, as she had satisfied herself in the very first half minute,in the instant even of introduction, that there was not the smallestsymptom of any knowledge or suspicion on Mrs Croft's side, to give a biasof any sort.
She was quite easy on that head, and consequentlyfull of strength and courage, till for a moment electrified byMrs Croft's suddenly saying,--"It was you, and not your sister, I find, that my brother hadthe pleasure of being acquainted with, when he was in this country."
Anne hoped she had outlived the age of blushing; but the age of emotionshe certainly had not.
"Perhaps you may not have heard that he is married?"
added Mrs Croft.
She could now answer as she ought; and was happy to feel,when Mrs Croft's next words explained it to be Mr Wentworthof whom she spoke, that she had said nothing which might not dofor either brother.
She immediately felt how reasonable it was,that Mrs Croft should be thinking and speaking of Edward,and not of Frederick; and with shame at her own forgetfulnessapplied herself to the knowledge of their former neighbour'spresent state with proper interest.
The rest was all tranquillity; till, just as they were moving,she heard the Admiral say to Mary--"We are expecting a brother of Mrs Croft's here soon; I dare sayyou know him by name."
He was cut short by the eager attacks of the little boys,clinging to him like an old friend, and declaring he should not go;and being too much engrossed by proposals of carrying them awayin his coat pockets, &c., to have another moment for finishingor recollecting what he had begun, Anne was left to persuade herself,as well as she could, that the same brother must still be in question.
She could not, however, reach such a degree of certainty,as not to be anxious to hear whether anything had been said on the subjectat the other house, where the Crofts had previously been calling.
The folks of the Great House were to spend the evening of this dayat the Cottage; and it being now too late in the year for such visitsto be made on foot, the coach was beginning to be listened for,when the youngest Miss Musgrove walked in.
That she was comingto apologize, and that they should have to spend the evening by themselves,was the first black idea; and Mary was quite ready to be affronted,when Louisa made all right by saying, that she only came on foot,to leave more room for the harp, which was bringing in the carriage.
"And I will tell you our reason," she added, "and all about it.
I am come on to give you notice, that papa and mamma areout of spirits this evening, especially mamma; she is thinking so muchof poor Richard!
And we agreed it would be best to have the harp,for it seems to amuse her more than the piano-forte.
I will tell youwhy she is out of spirits.
When the Crofts called this morning,(they called here afterwards, did not they?
), they happened to say,that her brother, Captain Wentworth, is just returned to England,or paid off, or something, and is coming to see them almost directly;and most unluckily it came into mamma's head, when they were gone,that Wentworth, or something very like it, was the name ofpoor Richard's captain at one time; I do not know when or where,but a great while before he died, poor fellow!
And upon looking overhis letters and things, she found it was so, and is perfectly surethat this must be the very man, and her head is quite full of it,and of poor Richard!
So we must be as merry as we can, that she may notbe dwelling upon such gloomy things."
The real circumstances of this pathetic piece of family history were,that the Musgroves had had the ill fortune of a very troublesome,hopeless son; and the good fortune to lose him before he reachedhis twentieth year; that he had been sent to sea because he was stupidand unmanageable on shore; that he had been very little cared forat any time by his family, though quite as much as he deserved;seldom heard of, and scarcely at all regretted, when the intelligenceof his death abroad had worked its way to Uppercross, two years before.
He had, in fact, though his sisters were now doing all they could for him,by calling him "poor Richard," been nothing better than a thick-headed,unfeeling, unprofitable Dick Musgrove, who had never done anythingto entitle himself to more than the abbreviation of his name,living or dead.
He had been several years at sea, and had, in the course of those removalsto which all midshipmen are liable, and especially such midshipmenas every captain wishes to get rid of, been six months on boardCaptain Frederick Wentworth's frigate, the Laconia; and from the Laconiahe had, under the influence of his captain, written the only two letterswhich his father and mother had ever received from him during the wholeof his absence; that is to say, the only two disinterested letters;all the rest had been mere applications for money.
In each letter he had spoken well of his captain; but yet,so little were they in the habit of attending to such matters,so unobservant and incurious were they as to the names of men or ships,that it had made scarcely any impression at the time; and that Mrs Musgroveshould have been suddenly struck, this very day, with a recollectionof the name of Wentworth, as connected with her son, seemed one of thoseextraordinary bursts of mind which do sometimes occur.
She had gone to her letters, and found it all as she supposed;and the re-perusal of these letters, after so long an interval,her poor son gone for ever, and all the strength of his faults forgotten,had affected her spirits exceedingly, and thrown her intogreater grief for him than she had know on first hearing of his death.
Mr Musgrove was, in a lesser degree, affected likewise; and whenthey reached the cottage, they were evidently in want, first,of being listened to anew on this subject, and afterwards,of all the relief which cheerful companions could give them.
To hear them talking so much of Captain Wentworth, repeating his nameso often, puzzling over past years, and at last ascertaining that it might,that it probably would, turn out to be the very same Captain Wentworthwhom they recollected meeting, once or twice, after their coming backfrom Clifton--a very fine young man--but they could not say whetherit was seven or eight years ago, was a new sort of trial to Anne's nerves.
She found, however, that it was one to which she must inure herself.
Since he actually was expected in the country, she must teach herselfto be insensible on such points.
And not only did it appear thathe was expected, and speedily, but the Musgroves, in their warm gratitudefor the kindness he had shewn poor Dick, and very high respectfor his character, stamped as it was by poor Dick's having beensix months under his care, and mentioning him in strong,though not perfectly well-spelt praise, as "a fine dashing felow,only two perticular about the schoolmaster," were bent onintroducing themselves, and seeking his acquaintance, as soon asthey could hear of his arrival.
The resolution of doing so helped to form the comfort of their evening.
Chapter 7A very few days more, and Captain Wentworth was known to be at Kellynch,and Mr Musgrove had called on him, and come back warm in his praise,and he was engaged with the Crofts to dine at Uppercross,by the end of another week.
It had been a great disappointmentto Mr Musgrove to find that no earlier day could be fixed,so impatient was he to shew his gratitude, by seeing Captain Wentworthunder his own roof, and welcoming him to all that was strongestand best in his cellars.
But a week must pass; only a week,in Anne's reckoning, and then, she supposed, they must meet;and soon she began to wish that she could feel secure even for a week.
Captain Wentworth made a very early return to Mr Musgrove's civility,and she was all but calling there in the same half hour.
She and Mary were actually setting forward for the Great House,where, as she afterwards learnt, they must inevitably have found him,when they were stopped by the eldest boy's being at that momentbrought home in consequence of a bad fall.
The child's situationput the visit entirely aside; but she could not hear of her escapewith indifference, even in the midst of the serious anxietywhich they afterwards felt on his account.
His collar-bone was found to be dislocated, and such injuryreceived in the back, as roused the most alarming ideas.
It was an afternoon of distress, and Anne had every thing to do at once;the apothecary to send for, the father to have pursued and informed,the mother to support and keep from hysterics, the servants to control,the youngest child to banish, and the poor suffering one to attendand soothe; besides sending, as soon as she recollected it,proper notice to the other house, which brought her an accessionrather of frightened, enquiring companions, than of very useful assistants.
Her brother's return was the first comfort; he could take best careof his wife; and the second blessing was the arrival of the apothecary.
Till he came and had examined the child, their apprehensions werethe worse for being vague; they suspected great injury, but knew not where;but now the collar-bone was soon replaced, and though Mr Robinsonfelt and felt, and rubbed, and looked grave, and spoke low wordsboth to the father and the aunt, still they were all to hope the best,and to be able to part and eat their dinner in tolerable ease of mind;and then it was, just before they parted, that the two young auntswere able so far to digress from their nephew's state, as to givethe information of Captain Wentworth's visit; staying five minutes behindtheir father and mother, to endeavour to express how perfectly delightedthey were with him, how much handsomer, how infinitely more agreeablethey thought him than any individual among their male acquaintance,who had been at all a favourite before.
How glad they had beento hear papa invite him to stay dinner, how sorry when he saidit was quite out of his power, and how glad again when he had promisedin reply to papa and mamma's farther pressing invitations to comeand dine with them on the morrow--actually on the morrow;and he had promised it in so pleasant a manner, as if he feltall the motive of their attention just as he ought.
And in short,he had looked and said everything with such exquisite grace,that they could assure them all, their heads were both turned by him;and off they ran, quite as full of glee as of love, and apparentlymore full of Captain Wentworth than of little Charles.
The same story and the same raptures were repeated, when the two girls camewith their father, through the gloom of the evening, to make enquiries;and Mr Musgrove, no longer under the first uneasiness about his heir,could add his confirmation and praise, and hope there would be nowno occasion for putting Captain Wentworth off, and only be sorry to thinkthat the cottage party, probably, would not like to leave the little boy,to give him the meeting.
"Oh no; as to leaving the little boy,"both father and mother were in much too strong and recent alarmto bear the thought; and Anne, in the joy of the escape,could not help adding her warm protestations to theirs.
Charles Musgrove, indeed, afterwards, shewed more of inclination;"the child was going on so well, and he wished so much to be introducedto Captain Wentworth, that, perhaps, he might join them in the evening;he would not dine from home, but he might walk in for half an hour."
But in this he was eagerly opposed by his wife, with "Oh!
no, indeed,Charles, I cannot bear to have you go away.
Only think if anythingshould happen?"
The child had a good night, and was going on well the next day.
It must be a work of time to ascertain that no injury had beendone to the spine; but Mr Robinson found nothing to increase alarm,and Charles Musgrove began, consequently, to feel no necessityfor longer confinement.
The child was to be kept in bed and amusedas quietly as possible; but what was there for a father to do?
This was quite a female case, and it would be highly absurd in him,who could be of no use at home, to shut himself up.
His fathervery much wished him to meet Captain Wentworth, and there beingno sufficient reason against it, he ought to go; and it ended in hismaking a bold, public declaration, when he came in from shooting,of his meaning to dress directly, and dine at the other house.
"Nothing can be going on better than the child," said he;"so I told my father, just now, that I would come, and he thought mequite right.
Your sister being with you, my love, I have no scruple at all.
You would not like to leave him yourself, but you see I can be of no use.
Anne will send for me if anything is the matter."
Husbands and wives generally understand when opposition will be vain.
Mary knew, from Charles's manner of speaking, that he wasquite determined on going, and that it would be of no use to teaze him.
She said nothing, therefore, till he was out of the room,but as soon as there was only Anne to hear--"So you and I are to be left to shift by ourselves, with thispoor sick child; and not a creature coming near us all the evening!
I knew how it would be.
This is always my luck.
If there isanything disagreeable going on men are always sure to get out of it,and Charles is as bad as any of them.
Very unfeeling!
I must sayit is very unfeeling of him to be running away from his poor little boy.
Talks of his being going on so well!
How does he know that he isgoing on well, or that there may not be a sudden change half an hour hence?
I did not think Charles would have been so unfeeling.
So here he is togo away and enjoy himself, and because I am the poor mother,I am not to be allowed to stir; and yet, I am sure, I am more unfitthan anybody else to be about the child.
My being the motheris the very reason why my feelings should not be tried.
I am not at allequal to it.
You saw how hysterical I was yesterday."
"But that was only the effect of the suddenness of your alarm--of the shock.
You will not be hysterical again.
I dare say we shall havenothing to distress us.
I perfectly understand Mr Robinson's directions,and have no fears; and indeed, Mary, I cannot wonder at your husband.
Nursing does not belong to a man; it is not his province.
A sick child is always the mother's property:  her own feelingsgenerally make it so."
"I hope I am as fond of my child as any mother, but I do not knowthat I am of any more use in the sick-room than Charles,for I cannot be always scolding and teazing the poor child when it is ill;and you saw, this morning, that if I told him to keep quiet,he was sure to begin kicking about.
I have not nervesfor the sort of thing."
"But, could you be comfortable yourself, to be spendingthe whole evening away from the poor boy?"
"Yes; you see his papa can, and why should not I?
Jemima is so careful;and she could send us word every hour how he was.
I really thinkCharles might as well have told his father we would all come.
I am not more alarmed about little Charles now than he is.
I was dreadfully alarmed yesterday, but the case is very different to-day."
"Well, if you do not think it too late to give notice for yourself,suppose you were to go, as well as your husband.
Leave little Charlesto my care.
Mr and Mrs Musgrove cannot think it wrong while I remainwith him."
"Are you serious?"
cried Mary, her eyes brightening.
"Dear me!
that's a very good thought, very good, indeed.
To be sure,I may just as well go as not, for I am of no use at home--am I?
and it only harasses me.
You, who have not a mother's feelings,are a great deal the properest person.
You can make little Charlesdo anything; he always minds you at a word.
It will be a great deal betterthan leaving him only with Jemima.
Oh!
I shall certainly go;I am sure I ought if I can, quite as much as Charles, for they want meexcessively to be acquainted with Captain Wentworth, and I knowyou do not mind being left alone.
An excellent thought of yours,indeed, Anne.
I will go and tell Charles, and get ready directly.
You can send for us, you know, at a moment's notice, if anythingis the matter; but I dare say there will be nothing to alarm you.
I should not go, you may be sure, if I did not feel quite at easeabout my dear child."
The next moment she was tapping at her husband's dressing-room door,and as Anne followed her up stairs, she was in time forthe whole conversation, which began with Mary's saying,in a tone of great exultation--"I mean to go with you, Charles, for I am of no more use at homethan you are.
If I were to shut myself up for ever with the child,I should not be able to persuade him to do anything he did not like.
Anne will stay; Anne undertakes to stay at home and take care of him.
It is Anne's own proposal, and so I shall go with you, which will bea great deal better, for I have not dined at the other house since Tuesday."
"This is very kind of Anne," was her husband's answer, "and I should bevery glad to have you go; but it seems rather hard that she should beleft at home by herself, to nurse our sick child."
Anne was now at hand to take up her own cause, and the sincerityof her manner being soon sufficient to convince him, where convictionwas at least very agreeable, he had no farther scruples as to her beingleft to dine alone, though he still wanted her to join them in the evening,when the child might be at rest for the night, and kindly urged herto let him come and fetch her, but she was quite unpersuadable;and this being the case, she had ere long the pleasure of seeing themset off together in high spirits.
They were gone, she hoped,to be happy, however oddly constructed such happiness might seem;as for herself, she was left with as many sensations of comfort,as were, perhaps, ever likely to be hers.
She knew herself to beof the first utility to the child; and what was it to herif Frederick Wentworth were only half a mile distant, making himselfagreeable to others?
She would have liked to know how he felt as to a meeting.
Perhaps indifferent, if indifference could exist under such circumstances.
He must be either indifferent or unwilling.
Had he wishedever to see her again, he need not have waited till this time;he would have done what she could not but believe that in his placeshe should have done long ago, when events had been early giving himthe independence which alone had been wanting.
Her brother and sister came back delighted with their new acquaintance,and their visit in general.
There had been music, singing,talking, laughing, all that was most agreeable; charming mannersin Captain Wentworth, no shyness or reserve; they seemed allto know each other perfectly, and he was coming the very next morningto shoot with Charles.
He was to come to breakfast, but not at the Cottage,though that had been proposed at first; but then he had been pressedto come to the Great House instead, and he seemed afraid of beingin Mrs Charles Musgrove's way, on account of the child, and therefore,somehow, they hardly knew how, it ended in Charles's being to meet himto breakfast at his father's.
Anne understood it.
He wished to avoid seeing her.
He had inquiredafter her, she found, slightly, as might suit a former slight acquaintance,seeming to acknowledge such as she had acknowledged, actuated, perhaps,by the same view of escaping introduction when they were to meet.
The morning hours of the Cottage were always later than thoseof the other house, and on the morrow the difference was so greatthat Mary and Anne were not more than beginning breakfast whenCharles came in to say that they were just setting off, that he wascome for his dogs, that his sisters were following with Captain Wentworth;his sisters meaning to visit Mary and the child, and Captain Wentworthproposing also to wait on her for a few minutes if not inconvenient;and though Charles had answered for the child's being in no such stateas could make it inconvenient, Captain Wentworth would not be satisfiedwithout his running on to give notice.
Mary, very much gratified by this attention, was delighted to receive him,while a thousand feelings rushed on Anne, of which this wasthe most consoling, that it would soon be over.
And it was soon over.
In two minutes after Charles's preparation, the others appeared;they were in the drawing-room.
Her eye half met Captain Wentworth's,a bow, a curtsey passed; she heard his voice; he talked to Mary,said all that was right, said something to the Miss Musgroves,enough to mark an easy footing; the room seemed full, full of personsand voices, but a few minutes ended it.
Charles shewed himselfat the window, all was ready, their visitor had bowed and was gone,the Miss Musgroves were gone too, suddenly resolving to walkto the end of the village with the sportsmen:  the room was cleared,and Anne might finish her breakfast as she could.
"It is over!
it is over!"
she repeated to herself again and again,in nervous gratitude.
"The worst is over!"
Mary talked, but she could not attend.
She had seen him.
They had met.
They had been once more in the same room.
Soon, however, she began to reason with herself, and try to be feeling less.
Eight years, almost eight years had passed, since all had been given up.
How absurd to be resuming the agitation which such an intervalhad banished into distance and indistinctness!
What might noteight years do?
Events of every description, changes, alienations,removals--all, all must be comprised in it, and oblivion of the past--how natural, how certain too!
It included nearly a third partof her own life.
Alas!
with all her reasoning, she found, that to retentive feelingseight years may be little more than nothing.
Now, how were his sentiments to be read?
Was this likewishing to avoid her?
And the next moment she was hating herselffor the folly which asked the question.
On one other question which perhaps her utmost wisdommight not have prevented, she was soon spared all suspense;for, after the Miss Musgroves had returned and finished their visitat the Cottage she had this spontaneous information from Mary: --"Captain Wentworth is not very gallant by you, Anne, though he wasso attentive to me.
Henrietta asked him what he thought of you,when they went away, and he said, `You were so altered he should nothave known you again.'"
Mary had no feelings to make her respect her sister's in a common way,but she was perfectly unsuspicious of being inflicting any peculiar wound.
"Altered beyond his knowledge."
Anne fully submitted, in silent,deep mortification.
Doubtless it was so, and she could take no revenge,for he was not altered, or not for the worse.
She had alreadyacknowledged it to herself, and she could not think differently,let him think of her as he would.
No:  the years which had destroyedher youth and bloom had only given him a more glowing, manly,open look, in no respect lessening his personal advantages.
She had seen the same Frederick Wentworth.
"So altered that he should not have known her again!"
These were wordswhich could not but dwell with her.
Yet she soon began to rejoicethat she had heard them.
They were of sobering tendency;they allayed agitation; they composed, and consequently mustmake her happier.
Frederick Wentworth had used such words, or something like them,but without an idea that they would be carried round to her.
He had thought her wretchedly altered, and in the first moment of appeal,had spoken as he felt.
He had not forgiven Anne Elliot.
She had used him ill, deserted and disappointed him; and worse,she had shewn a feebleness of character in doing so, which his own decided,confident temper could not endure.
She had given him up to oblige others.
It had been the effect of over-persuasion.
It had beenweakness and timidity.
He had been most warmly attached to her, and had never seen a woman sincewhom he thought her equal; but, except from some natural sensationof curiosity, he had no desire of meeting her again.
Her power with himwas gone for ever.
It was now his object to marry.
He was rich, and being turned on shore,fully intended to settle as soon as he could be properly tempted;actually looking round, ready to fall in love with all the speedwhich a clear head and a quick taste could allow.
He had a heartfor either of the Miss Musgroves, if they could catch it; a heart,in short, for any pleasing young woman who came in his way,excepting Anne Elliot.
This was his only secret exception,when he said to his sister, in answer to her suppositions:--"Yes, here I am, Sophia, quite ready to make a foolish match.
Anybody between fifteen and thirty may have me for asking.
A little beauty, and a few smiles, and a few compliments to the navy,and I am a lost man.
Should not this be enough for a sailor,who has had no society among women to make him nice?"
He said it, she knew, to be contradicted.
His bright proud eyespoke the conviction that he was nice; and Anne Elliot wasnot out of his thoughts, when he more seriously describedthe woman he should wish to meet with.
"A strong mind,with sweetness of manner," made the first and the last of the description.
"That is the woman I want," said he.
"Something a little inferiorI shall of course put up with, but it must not be much.
If I am a fool,I shall be a fool indeed, for I have thought on the subjectmore than most men."
Chapter 8From this time Captain Wentworth and Anne Elliot were repeatedlyin the same circle.
They were soon dining in company togetherat Mr Musgrove's, for the little boy's state could no longersupply his aunt with a pretence for absenting herself; and this wasbut the beginning of other dinings and other meetings.
Whether former feelings were to be renewed must be brought to the proof;former times must undoubtedly be brought to the recollection of each;they could not but be reverted to; the year of their engagementcould not but be named by him, in the little narratives or descriptionswhich conversation called forth.
His profession qualified him,his disposition lead him, to talk; and "That was in the year six;""That happened before I went to sea in the year six," occurredin the course of the first evening they spent together:and though his voice did not falter, and though she had no reasonto suppose his eye wandering towards her while he spoke,Anne felt the utter impossibility, from her knowledge of his mind,that he could be unvisited by remembrance any more than herself.
There must be the same immediate association of thought,though she was very far from conceiving it to be of equal pain.
They had no conversation together, no intercourse but whatthe commonest civility required.
Once so much to each other!
Now nothing!
There had been a time, when of all the large partynow filling the drawing-room at Uppercross, they would have found itmost difficult to cease to speak to one another.
With the exception,perhaps, of Admiral and Mrs Croft, who seemed particularly attachedand happy, (Anne could allow no other exceptions even amongthe married couples), there could have been no two hearts so open,no tastes so similar, no feelings so in unison, no countenances so beloved.
Now they were as strangers; nay, worse than strangers, for they couldnever become acquainted.
It was a perpetual estrangement.
When he talked, she heard the same voice, and discerned the same mind.
There was a very general ignorance of all naval matters throughout the party;and he was very much questioned, and especially by the two Miss Musgroves,who seemed hardly to have any eyes but for him, as to the mannerof living on board, daily regulations, food, hours, &c., and their surpriseat his accounts, at learning the degree of accommodation and arrangementwhich was practicable, drew from him some pleasant ridicule,which reminded Anne of the early days when she too had been ignorant,and she too had been accused of supposing sailors to be living on boardwithout anything to eat, or any cook to dress it if there were,or any servant to wait, or any knife and fork to use.
From thus listening and thinking, she was roused by a whisperof Mrs Musgrove's who, overcome by fond regrets, could not help saying--"Ah!
Miss Anne, if it had pleased Heaven to spare my poor son,I dare say he would have been just such another by this time."
Anne suppressed a smile, and listened kindly, while Mrs Musgroverelieved her heart a little more; and for a few minutes, therefore,could not keep pace with the conversation of the others.
When she could let her attention take its natural course again,she found the Miss Musgroves just fetching the Navy List(their own navy list, the first that had ever been at Uppercross),and sitting down together to pore over it, with the professed viewof finding out the ships that Captain Wentworth had commanded.
"Your first was the Asp, I remember; we will look for the Asp."
"You will not find her there.
Quite worn out and broken up.
I was the last man who commanded her.
Hardly fit for service then.
Reported fit for home service for a year or two, and so I was sent offto the West Indies."
The girls looked all amazement.
"The Admiralty," he continued, "entertain themselves now and then,with sending a few hundred men to sea, in a ship not fit to be employed.
But they have a great many to provide for; and among the thousandsthat may just as well go to the bottom as not, it is impossiblefor them to distinguish the very set who may be least missed."
"Phoo!
phoo!"
cried the Admiral, "what stuff these young fellows talk!
Never was a better sloop than the Asp in her day.
For an old built sloop,you would not see her equal.
Lucky fellow to get her!
He knows theremust have been twenty better men than himself applying for herat the same time.
Lucky fellow to get anything so soon,with no more interest than his."
"I felt my luck, Admiral, I assure you;" replied Captain Wentworth,seriously.
"I was as well satisfied with my appointment as you can desire.
It was a great object with me at that time to be at sea;a very great object, I wanted to be doing something."
"To be sure you did.
What should a young fellow like you do ashorefor half a year together?
If a man had not a wife, he soon wantsto be afloat again."
"But, Captain Wentworth," cried Louisa, "how vexed you must have beenwhen you came to the Asp, to see what an old thing they had given you."
"I knew pretty well what she was before that day;" said he, smiling.
"I had no more discoveries to make than you would have as tothe fashion and strength of any old pelisse, which you had seenlent about among half your acquaintance ever since you could remember,and which at last, on some very wet day, is lent to yourself.
Ah!
she was a dear old Asp to me.
She did all that I wanted.
I knew she would.
I knew that we should either go to the bottom together,or that she would be the making of me; and I never had two daysof foul weather all the time I was at sea in her; and aftertaking privateers enough to be very entertaining, I had the good luckin my passage home the next autumn, to fall in with the very French frigateI wanted.
I brought her into Plymouth; and here another instance of luck.
We had not been six hours in the Sound, when a gale came on,which lasted four days and nights, and which would have done forpoor old Asp in half the time; our touch with the Great Nationnot having much improved our condition.
Four-and-twenty hours later,and I should only have been a gallant Captain Wentworth,in a small paragraph at one corner of the newspapers; and being lostin only a sloop, nobody would have thought about me."
Anne's shudderingswere to herself alone; but the Miss Musgroves could be as openas they were sincere, in their exclamations of pity and horror.
"And so then, I suppose," said Mrs Musgrove, in a low voice,as if thinking aloud, "so then he went away to the Laconia, and therehe met with our poor boy.
Charles, my dear," (beckoning him to her),"do ask Captain Wentworth where it was he first met with your poor brother.
I always forgot."
"It was at Gibraltar, mother, I know.
Dick had been left ill at Gibraltar,with a recommendation from his former captain to Captain Wentworth."
"Oh!
but, Charles, tell Captain Wentworth, he need not be afraidof mentioning poor Dick before me, for it would be rather a pleasureto hear him talked of by such a good friend."
Charles, being somewhat more mindful of the probabilities of the case,only nodded in reply, and walked away.
The girls were now hunting for the Laconia; and Captain Wentworthcould not deny himself the pleasure of taking the precious volumeinto his own hands to save them the trouble, and once more read aloudthe little statement of her name and rate, and presentnon-commissioned class, observing over it that she too had beenone of the best friends man ever had.
"Ah!
those were pleasant days when I had the Laconia!
How fast Imade money in her.
A friend of mine and I had such a lovely cruisetogether off the Western Islands.
Poor Harville, sister!
You know how much he wanted money:  worse than myself.
He had a wife.
Excellent fellow.
I shall never forget his happiness.
He felt it all,so much for her sake.
I wished for him again the next summer,when I had still the same luck in the Mediterranean."
"And I am sure, Sir."
said Mrs Musgrove, "it was a lucky day for us,when you were put captain into that ship.
We shall never forgetwhat you did."
Her feelings made her speak low; and Captain Wentworth,hearing only in part, and probably not having Dick Musgrove at allnear his thoughts, looked rather in suspense, and as if waiting for more.
"My brother," whispered one of the girls; "mamma is thinkingof poor Richard."
"Poor dear fellow!"
continued Mrs Musgrove; "he was grown so steady,and such an excellent correspondent, while he was under your care!
Ah!
it would have been a happy thing, if he had never left you.
I assure you, Captain Wentworth, we are very sorry he ever left you."
There was a momentary expression in Captain Wentworth's face at this speech,a certain glance of his bright eye, and curl of his handsome mouth,which convinced Anne, that instead of sharing in Mrs Musgrove's kind wishes,as to her son, he had probably been at some pains to get rid of him;but it was too transient an indulgence of self-amusement to be detectedby any who understood him less than herself; in another momenthe was perfectly collected and serious, and almost instantly afterwardscoming up to the sofa, on which she and Mrs Musgrove were sitting,took a place by the latter, and entered into conversation with her,in a low voice, about her son, doing it with so much sympathyand natural grace, as shewed the kindest consideration for allthat was real and unabsurd in the parent's feelings.
They were actually on the same sofa, for Mrs Musgrove hadmost readily made room for him; they were divided only by Mrs Musgrove.
It was no insignificant barrier, indeed.
Mrs Musgrove was ofa comfortable, substantial size, infinitely more fitted by natureto express good cheer and good humour, than tenderness and sentiment;and while the agitations of Anne's slender form, and pensive face,may be considered as very completely screened, Captain Wentworthshould be allowed some credit for the self-command with whichhe attended to her large fat sighings over the destiny of a son,whom alive nobody had cared for.
Personal size and mental sorrow have certainly no necessary proportions.
A large bulky figure has as good a right to be in deep affliction,as the most graceful set of limbs in the world.
But, fair or not fair,there are unbecoming conjunctions, which reason will patronize in vain--which taste cannot tolerate--which ridicule will seize.
The Admiral, after taking two or three refreshing turns about the roomwith his hands behind him, being called to order by his wife,now came up to Captain Wentworth, and without any observationof what he might be interrupting, thinking only of his own thoughts,began with--"If you had been a week later at Lisbon, last spring, Frederick,you would have been asked to give a passage to Lady Mary Griersonand her daughters."
"Should I?
I am glad I was not a week later then."
The Admiral abused him for his want of gallantry.
He defended himself;though professing that he would never willingly admit any ladieson board a ship of his, excepting for a ball, or a visit,which a few hours might comprehend.
"But, if I know myself," said he, "this is from no want of gallantrytowards them.
It is rather from feeling how impossible it is,with all one's efforts, and all one's sacrifices, to makethe accommodations on board such as women ought to have.
There can be no want of gallantry, Admiral, in rating the claims of womento every personal comfort high, and this is what I do.
I hate to hearof women on board, or to see them on board; and no ship under my commandshall ever convey a family of ladies anywhere, if I can help it."
This brought his sister upon him.
"Oh!
Frederick!
But I cannot believe it of you.
--All idle refinement!
--Women may be as comfortable on board, as in the best house in England.
I believe I have lived as much on board as most women, and I knownothing superior to the accommodations of a man-of-war.
I declareI have not a comfort or an indulgence about me, even at Kellynch Hall,"(with a kind bow to Anne), "beyond what I always had in most ofthe ships I have lived in; and they have been five altogether."
"Nothing to the purpose," replied her brother.
"You were livingwith your husband, and were the only woman on board."
"But you, yourself, brought Mrs Harville, her sister, her cousin,and three children, round from Portsmouth to Plymouth.
Where was thissuperfine, extraordinary sort of gallantry of yours then?"
"All merged in my friendship, Sophia.
I would assist anybrother officer's wife that I could, and I would bring anythingof Harville's from the world's end, if he wanted it.
But do not imaginethat I did not feel it an evil in itself."
"Depend upon it, they were all perfectly comfortable."
"I might not like them the better for that perhaps.
Such a numberof women and children have no right to be comfortable on board."
"My dear Frederick, you are talking quite idly.
Pray, what wouldbecome of us poor sailors' wives, who often want to be conveyed toone port or another, after our husbands, if everybody had your feelings?"
"My feelings, you see, did not prevent my taking Mrs Harvilleand all her family to Plymouth."
"But I hate to hear you talking so like a fine gentleman,and as if women were all fine ladies, instead of rational creatures.
We none of us expect to be in smooth water all our days."
"Ah!
my dear," said the Admiral, "when he had got a wife,he will sing a different tune.
When he is married, if we havethe good luck to live to another war, we shall see him do as you and I,and a great many others, have done.
We shall have him very thankfulto anybody that will bring him his wife."
"Ay, that we shall."
"Now I have done," cried Captain Wentworth.
"When once marriedpeople begin to attack me with,--`Oh!
you will think very differently,when you are married.'
I can only say, `No, I shall not;' and thenthey say again, `Yes, you will,' and there is an end of it."
He got up and moved away.
"What a great traveller you must have been, ma'am!"
said Mrs Musgroveto Mrs Croft.
"Pretty well, ma'am in the fifteen years of my marriage;though many women have done more.
I have crossed the Atlanticfour times, and have been once to the East Indies, and back again,and only once; besides being in different places about home:Cork, and Lisbon, and Gibraltar.
But I never went beyond the Streights,and never was in the West Indies.
We do not call Bermuda or Bahama,you know, the West Indies."
Mrs Musgrove had not a word to say in dissent; she could not accuse herselfof having ever called them anything in the whole course of her life.
"And I do assure you, ma'am," pursued Mrs Croft, "that nothing can exceedthe accommodations of a man-of-war; I speak, you know, of the higher rates.
When you come to a frigate, of course, you are more confined;though any reasonable woman may be perfectly happy in one of them;and I can safely say, that the happiest part of my life has been spenton board a ship.
While we were together, you know, there was nothingto be feared.
Thank God!
I have always been blessed withexcellent health, and no climate disagrees with me.
A little disorderedalways the first twenty-four hours of going to sea, but never knewwhat sickness was afterwards.
The only time I ever really sufferedin body or mind, the only time that I ever fancied myself unwell,or had any ideas of danger, was the winter that I passed by myself at Deal,when the Admiral (Captain Croft then) was in the North Seas.
I lived in perpetual fright at that time, and had all manner ofimaginary complaints from not knowing what to do with myself,or when I should hear from him next; but as long as we could be together,nothing ever ailed me, and I never met with the smallest inconvenience."
"Aye, to be sure.
Yes, indeed, oh yes!
I am quite of your opinion,Mrs Croft," was Mrs Musgrove's hearty answer.
"There is nothing so badas a separation.
I am quite of your opinion.
I know what it is,for Mr Musgrove always attends the assizes, and I am so glad whenthey are over, and he is safe back again."
The evening ended with dancing.
On its being proposed,Anne offered her services, as usual; and though her eyes would sometimesfill with tears as she sat at the instrument, she was extremely gladto be employed, and desired nothing in return but to be unobserved.
It was a merry, joyous party, and no one seemed in higher spiritsthan Captain Wentworth.
She felt that he had every thing to elevatehim which general attention and deference, and especially the attentionof all the young women, could do.
The Miss Hayters, the femalesof the family of cousins already mentioned, were apparently admittedto the honour of being in love with him; and as for Henrietta and Louisa,they both seemed so entirely occupied by him, that nothing butthe continued appearance of the most perfect good-will between themselvescould have made it credible that they were not decided rivals.
If he were a little spoilt by such universal, such eager admiration,who could wonder?
These were some of the thoughts which occupied Anne, while her fingerswere mechanically at work, proceeding for half an hour together,equally without error, and without consciousness.
Once she feltthat he was looking at herself,  observing her altered features,perhaps, trying to trace in them the ruins of the face which had oncecharmed him; and once she knew that he must have spoken of her;she was hardly aware of it, till she heard the answer; but then she wassure of his having asked his partner whether Miss Elliot never danced?
The answer was, "Oh, no; never; she has quite given up dancing.
She had rather play.
She is never tired of playing."
Once, too,he spoke to her.
She had left the instrument on the dancing being over,and he had sat down to try to make out an air which he wishedto give the Miss Musgroves an idea of.
Unintentionally she returnedto that part of the room; he saw her, and, instantly rising,said, with studied politeness--"I beg your pardon, madam, this is your seat;" and though she immediatelydrew back with a decided negative, he was not to be inducedto sit down again.
Anne did not wish for more of such looks and speeches.
His cold politeness, his ceremonious grace, were worse than anything.
Chapter 9Captain Wentworth was come to Kellynch as to a home, to stayas long as he liked, being as thoroughly the object ofthe Admiral's fraternal kindness as of his wife's.
He had intended,on first arriving, to proceed very soon into Shropshire,and visit the brother settled in that country, but the attractionsof Uppercross induced him to put this off.
There was so muchof friendliness, and of flattery, and of everything most bewitchingin his reception there; the old were so hospitable, the young so agreeable,that he could not but resolve to remain where he was, and take allthe charms and perfections of Edward's wife upon credit a little longer.
It was soon Uppercross with him almost every day.
The Musgrovescould hardly be more ready to invite than he to come, particularlyin the morning, when he had no companion at home, for the Admiraland Mrs Croft were generally out of doors together, interesting themselvesin their new possessions, their grass, and their sheep, and dawdling aboutin a way not endurable to a third person, or driving out in a gig,lately added to their establishment.
Hitherto there had been but one opinion of Captain Wentworthamong the Musgroves and their dependencies.
It was unvarying,warm admiration everywhere; but this intimate footing was not morethan established, when a certain Charles Hayter returned among them,to be a good deal disturbed by it, and to think Captain Wentworthvery much in the way.
Charles Hayter was the eldest of all the cousins, and a very amiable,pleasing young man, between whom and Henrietta there had beena considerable appearance of attachment previous to Captain Wentworth'sintroduction.
He was in orders; and having a curacy in the neighbourhood,where residence was not required, lived at his father's house,only two miles from Uppercross.
A short absence from homehad left his fair one unguarded by his attentions at this critical period,and when he came back he had the pain of finding very altered manners,and of seeing Captain Wentworth.
Mrs Musgrove and Mrs Hayter were sisters.
They had each had money,but their marriages had made a material difference intheir degree of consequence.
Mr Hayter had some property of his own,but it was insignificant compared with Mr Musgrove's; and whilethe Musgroves were in the first class of society in the country,the young Hayters would, from their parents' inferior, retired,and unpolished way of living, and their own defective education,have been hardly in any class at all, but for their connexionwith Uppercross, this eldest son of course excepted, who had chosento be a scholar and a gentleman, and who was very superiorin cultivation and manners to all the rest.
The two families had always been on excellent terms, there being no prideon one side, and no envy on the other, and only such a consciousnessof superiority in the Miss Musgroves, as made them pleasedto improve their cousins.
Charles's attentions to Henriettahad been observed by her father and mother without any disapprobation.
"It would not be a great match for her; but if Henrietta liked him,"--and Henrietta did seem to like him.
Henrietta fully thought so herself, before Captain Wentworth came;but from that time Cousin Charles had been very much forgotten.
Which of the two sisters was preferred by Captain Wentworth wasas yet quite doubtful, as far as Anne's observation reached.
Henrietta was perhaps the prettiest, Louisa had the higher spirits;and she knew not now, whether the more gentle or the more lively characterwere most likely to attract him.
Mr and Mrs Musgrove, either from seeing little, or froman entire confidence in the discretion of both their daughters,and of all the young men who came near them, seemed to leave everythingto take its chance.
There was not the smallest appearance of solicitudeor remark about them in the Mansion-house; but it was differentat the Cottage:  the young couple there were more disposedto speculate and wonder; and Captain Wentworth had not been abovefour or five times in the Miss Musgroves' company, and Charles Hayterhad but just reappeared, when Anne had to listen to the opinionsof her brother and sister, as to which was the one liked best.
Charles gave it for Louisa, Mary for Henrietta, but quite agreeingthat to have him marry either could be extremely delightful.
Charles "had never seen a pleasanter man in his life; and from whathe had once heard Captain Wentworth himself say, was very sure thathe had not made less than twenty thousand pounds by the war.
Here was a fortune at once; besides which, there would be the chanceof what might be done in any future war; and he was sure Captain Wentworthwas as likely a man to distinguish himself as any officer in the navy.
Oh!
it would be a capital match for either of his sisters."
"Upon my word it would," replied Mary.
"Dear me!
If he shouldrise to any very great honours!
If he should ever be made a baronet!
`Lady Wentworth' sounds very well.
That would be a noble thing,indeed, for Henrietta!
She would take place of me then, and Henriettawould not dislike that.
Sir Frederick and Lady Wentworth!
It would be but a new creation, however, and I never think muchof your new creations."
It suited Mary best to think Henrietta the one preferredon the very account of Charles Hayter, whose pretensions she wishedto see put an end to.
She looked down very decidedly upon the Hayters,and thought it would be quite a misfortune to have the existing connectionbetween the families renewed--very sad for herself and her children.
"You know," said she, "I cannot think him at all a fit match for Henrietta;and considering the alliances which the Musgroves have made,she has no right to throw herself away.
I do not think any young womanhas a right to make a choice that may be disagreeable and inconvenientto the principal part of her family, and be giving bad connectionsto those who have not been used to them.
And, pray, who is Charles Hayter?
Nothing but a country curate.
A most improper match for Miss Musgroveof Uppercross."
Her husband, however, would not agree with her here; for besides havinga regard for his cousin, Charles Hayter was an eldest son,and he saw things as an eldest son himself.
"Now you are taking nonsense, Mary," was therefore his answer.
"It would not be a great match for Henrietta, but Charles hasa very fair chance, through the Spicers, of getting something fromthe Bishop in the course of a year or two; and you will please to remember,that he is the eldest son; whenever my uncle dies, he steps into verypretty property.
The estate at Winthrop is not less thantwo hundred and fifty acres, besides the farm near Taunton,which is some of the best land in the country.
I grant you,that any of them but Charles would be a very shocking match for Henrietta,and indeed it could not be; he is the only one that could be possible;but he is a very good-natured, good sort of a fellow; and whenever Winthropcomes into his hands, he will make a different sort of place of it,and live in a very different sort of way; and with that property,he will never be a contemptible man--good, freehold property.
No, no;Henrietta might do worse than marry Charles Hayter; and if she has him,and Louisa can get Captain Wentworth, I shall be very well satisfied."
"Charles may say what he pleases," cried Mary to Anne, as soon ashe was out of the room, "but it would be shocking to have Henriettamarry Charles Hayter; a very bad thing for her, and still worsefor me; and therefore it is very much to be wished that Captain Wentworthmay soon put him quite out of her head, and I have very little doubtthat he has.
She took hardly any notice of Charles Hayter yesterday.
I wish you had been there to see her behaviour.
And as toCaptain Wentworth's liking Louisa as well as Henrietta, it is nonsenseto say so; for he certainly does like Henrietta a great deal the best.
But Charles is so positive!
I wish you had been with us yesterday,for then you might have decided between us; and I am sure youwould have thought as I did, unless you had been determinedto give it against me."
A dinner at Mr Musgrove's had been the occasion when all these thingsshould have been seen by Anne; but she had staid at home,under the mixed plea of a headache of her own, and some returnof indisposition in little Charles.
She had thought only of avoidingCaptain Wentworth; but an escape from being appealed to as umpirewas now added to the advantages of a quiet evening.
As to Captain Wentworth's views, she deemed it of more consequencethat he should know his own mind early enough not to be endangeringthe happiness of either sister, or impeaching his own honour,than that he should prefer Henrietta to Louisa, or Louisa to Henrietta.
Either of them would, in all probability, make him an affectionate,good-humoured wife.
With regard to Charles Hayter, she had delicacywhich must be pained by any lightness of conduct in a well-meaningyoung woman, and a heart to sympathize in any of the sufferingsit occasioned; but if Henrietta found herself mistaken in the natureof her feelings, the alternation could not be understood too soon.
Charles Hayter had met with much to disquiet and mortify himin his cousin's behaviour.
She had too old a regard for himto be so wholly estranged as might in two meetings extinguishevery past hope, and leave him nothing to do but to keep awayfrom Uppercross:  but there was such a change as became very alarming,when such a man as Captain Wentworth was to be regarded asthe probable cause.
He had been absent only two Sundays,and when they parted, had left her interested, even to the heightof his wishes, in his prospect of soon quitting his present curacy,and obtaining that of Uppercross instead.
It had then seemed the objectnearest her heart, that Dr Shirley, the rector, who for more thanforty years had been zealously discharging all the duties of his office,but was now growing too infirm for many of them, should be quite fixedon engaging a curate; should make his curacy quite as goodas he could afford, and should give Charles Hayter the promise of it.
The advantage of his having to come only to Uppercross, instead of goingsix miles another way; of his having, in every respect, a better curacy;of his belonging to their dear Dr Shirley, and of dear, good Dr Shirley'sbeing relieved from the duty which he could no longer get throughwithout most injurious fatigue, had been a great deal, even to Louisa,but had been almost everything to Henrietta.
When he came back, alas!
the zeal of the business was gone by.
Louisa could not listen at allto his account of a conversation which he had just held with Dr Shirley:she was at a window, looking out for Captain Wentworth; and even Henriettahad at best only a divided attention to give, and seemed to have forgottenall the former doubt and solicitude of the negotiation.
"Well, I am very glad indeed:  but I always thought you would have it;I always thought you sure.
It did not appear to me that--in short,you know, Dr Shirley must have a curate, and you had secured his promise.
Is he coming, Louisa?"
One morning, very soon after the dinner at the Musgroves,at which Anne had not been present, Captain Wentworth walked intothe drawing-room at the Cottage, where were only herself and the littleinvalid Charles, who was lying on the sofa.
The surprise of finding himself almost alone with Anne Elliot,deprived his manners of their usual composure:  he started,and could only say, "I thought the Miss Musgroves had been here:Mrs Musgrove told me I should find them here," before he walkedto the window to recollect himself, and feel how he ought to behave.
"They are up stairs with my sister:  they will be down in a few moments,I dare say," had been Anne's reply, in all the confusion that was natural;and if the child had not called her to come and do something for him,she would have been out of the room the next moment, and releasedCaptain Wentworth as well as herself.
He continued at the window; and after calmly and politely saying,"I hope the little boy is better," was silent.
She was obliged to kneel down by the sofa, and remain thereto satisfy her patient; and thus they continued a few minutes,when, to her very great satisfaction, she heard some other personcrossing the little vestibule.
She hoped, on turning her head,to see the master of the house; but it proved to be onemuch less calculated for making matters easy--Charles Hayter,probably not at all better pleased by the sight of Captain Wentworththan Captain Wentworth had been by the sight of Anne.
She only attempted to say, "How do you do?
Will you not sit down?
The others will be here presently."
Captain Wentworth, however, came from his window, apparentlynot ill-disposed for conversation; but Charles Hayter soon put an endto his attempts by seating himself near the table, and taking upthe newspaper; and Captain Wentworth returned to his window.
Another minute brought another addition.
The younger boy,a remarkable stout, forward child, of two years old, having got the dooropened for him by some one without, made his determined appearanceamong them, and went straight to the sofa to see what was going on,and put in his claim to anything good that might be giving away.
There being nothing to eat, he could only have some play;and as his aunt would not let him tease his sick brother,he began to fasten himself upon her, as she knelt, in such a way that,busy as she was about Charles, she could not shake him off.
She spoke to him, ordered, entreated, and insisted in vain.
Once she did contrive to push him away, but the boy hadthe greater pleasure in getting upon her back again directly.
"Walter," said she, "get down this moment.
You are extremely troublesome.
I am very angry with you."
"Walter," cried Charles Hayter, "why do you not do as you are bid?
Do not you hear your aunt speak?
Come to me, Walter, come tocousin Charles."
But not a bit did Walter stir.
In another moment, however, she found herself in the state ofbeing released from him; some one was taking him from her,though he had bent down her head so much, that his little sturdy handswere unfastened from around her neck, and he was resolutely borne away,before she knew that Captain Wentworth had done it.
Her sensations on the discovery made her perfectly speechless.
She could not even thank him.
She could only hang over little Charles,with most disordered feelings.
His kindness in stepping forwardto her relief, the manner, the silence in which it had passed,the little particulars of the circumstance, with the conviction soonforced on her by the noise he was studiously making with the child,that he meant to avoid hearing her thanks, and rather soughtto testify that her conversation was the last of his wants,produced such a confusion of varying, but very painful agitation,as she could not recover from, till enabled by the entrance of Maryand the Miss Musgroves to make over her little patient to their cares,and leave the room.
She could not stay.
It might have beenan opportunity of watching the loves and jealousies of the four--they were now altogether; but she could stay for none of it.
It was evident that Charles Hayter was not well inclined towardsCaptain Wentworth.
She had a strong impression of his having said,in a vext tone of voice, after Captain Wentworth's interference,"You ought to have minded me, Walter; I told you not to teaze your aunt;"and could comprehend his regretting that Captain Wentworth should dowhat he ought to have done himself.
But neither Charles Hayter's feelings,nor anybody's feelings, could interest her, till she had a little betterarranged her own.
She was ashamed of herself, quite ashamedof being so nervous, so overcome by such a trifle; but so it was,and it required a long application of solitude and reflectionto recover her.
Chapter 10Other opportunities of making her observations could not fail to occur.
Anne had soon been in company with all the four together often enoughto have an opinion, though too wise to acknowledge as much at home,where she knew it would have satisfied neither husband nor wife;for while she considered Louisa to be rather the favourite,she could not but think, as far as she might dare to judge from memoryand experience, that Captain Wentworth was not in love with either.
They were more in love with him; yet there it was not love.
It was a little fever of admiration; but it might, probably must,end in love with some.
Charles Hayter seemed aware of being slighted,and yet Henrietta had sometimes the air of being divided between them.
Anne longed for the power of representing to them all what they were about,and of pointing out some of the evils they were exposing themselves to.
She did not attribute guile to any.
It was the highest satisfactionto her to believe Captain Wentworth not in the least awareof the pain he was occasioning.
There was no triumph, no pitiful triumphin his manner.
He had, probably, never heard, and never thought ofany claims of Charles Hayter.
He was only wrong in acceptingthe attentions (for accepting must be the word) of two young women at once.
After a short struggle, however, Charles Hayter seemed to quit the field.
Three days had passed without his coming once to Uppercross;a most decided change.
He had even refused one regular invitation to dinner;and having been found on the occasion by Mr Musgrove with some large booksbefore him, Mr and Mrs Musgrove were sure all could not be right,and talked, with grave faces, of his studying himself to death.
It was Mary's hope and belief that he had received a positive dismissalfrom Henrietta, and her husband lived under the constant dependenceof seeing him to-morrow.
Anne could only feel that Charles Hayterwas wise.
One morning, about this time Charles Musgrove and Captain Wentworthbeing gone a-shooting together, as the sisters in the Cottagewere sitting quietly at work, they were visited at the windowby the sisters from the Mansion-house.
It was a very fine November day, and the Miss Musgroves camethrough the little grounds, and stopped for no other purpose than to say,that they were going to take a long walk, and therefore concludedMary could not like to go with them; and when Mary immediately replied,with some jealousy at not being supposed a good walker, "Oh, yes,I should like to join you very much, I am very fond of a long walk;"Anne felt persuaded, by the looks of the two girls, that it was preciselywhat they did not wish, and admired again the sort of necessitywhich the family habits seemed to produce, of everything beingto be communicated, and everything being to be done together,however undesired and inconvenient.
She tried to dissuade Mary from going,but in vain; and that being the case, thought it best to acceptthe Miss Musgroves' much more cordial invitation to herself to go likewise,as she might be useful in turning back with her sister, and lesseningthe interference in any plan of their own.
"I cannot imagine why they should suppose I should not like a long walk,"said Mary, as she went up stairs.
"Everybody is always supposingthat I am not a good walker; and yet they would not have been pleased,if we had refused to join them.
When people come in this manneron purpose to ask us, how can one say no?"
Just as they were setting off, the gentlemen returned.
They had taken outa young dog, who had spoilt their sport, and sent them back early.
Their time and strength, and spirits, were, therefore, exactly readyfor this walk, and they entered into it with pleasure.
Could Annehave foreseen such a junction, she would have staid at home; but,from some feelings of interest and curiosity, she fancied now that it wastoo late to retract, and the whole six set forward togetherin the direction chosen by the Miss Musgroves, who evidentlyconsidered the walk as under their guidance.
Anne's object was, not to be in the way of anybody; and wherethe narrow paths across the fields made many separations necessary,to keep with her brother and sister.
Her pleasure in the walkmust arise from the exercise and the day, from the view ofthe last smiles of the year upon the tawny leaves, and withered hedges,and from repeating to herself some few of the thousand poeticaldescriptions extant of autumn, that season of peculiar andinexhaustible influence on the mind of taste and tenderness,that season which had drawn from every poet, worthy of being read,some attempt at description, or some lines of feeling.
She occupied her mind as much as possible in such like musingsand quotations; but it was not possible, that when within reachof Captain Wentworth's conversation with either of the Miss Musgroves,she should not try to hear it; yet she caught little very remarkable.
It was mere lively chat, such as any young persons, on an intimate footing,might fall into.
He was more engaged with Louisa than with Henrietta.
Louisa certainly put more forward for his notice than her sister.
This distinction appeared to increase, and there was one speechof Louisa's which struck her.
After one of the many praises of the day,which were continually bursting forth, Captain Wentworth added: --"What glorious weather for the Admiral and my sister!
They meant to takea long drive this morning; perhaps we may hail them fromsome of these hills.
They talked of coming into this side of the country.
I wonder whereabouts they will upset to-day.
Oh!
it does happenvery often, I assure you; but my sister makes nothing of it;she would as lieve be tossed out as not."
"Ah!
You make the most of it, I know," cried Louisa, "but if it werereally so, I should do just the same in her place.
If I loved a man,as she loves the Admiral, I would always be with him, nothing should everseparate us, and I would rather be overturned by him, than driven safelyby anybody else."
It was spoken with enthusiasm.
"Had you?"
cried he, catching the same tone; "I honour you!"
And there was silence between them for a little while.
Anne could not immediately fall into a quotation again.
The sweet scenesof autumn were for a while put by, unless some tender sonnet,fraught with the apt analogy of the declining year, with declininghappiness, and the images of youth and hope, and spring, all gone together,blessed her memory.
She roused herself to say, as they struck by orderinto another path, "Is not this one of the ways to Winthrop?"
But nobody heard, or, at least, nobody answered her.
Winthrop, however, or its environs--for young men are, sometimesto be met with, strolling about near home--was their destination;and after another half mile of gradual ascent through large enclosures,where the ploughs at work, and the fresh made path spoke the farmercounteracting the sweets of poetical despondence, and meaningto have spring again, they gained the summit of the most considerable hill,which parted Uppercross and Winthrop, and soon commanded a full viewof the latter, at the foot of the hill on the other side.
Winthrop, without beauty and without dignity, was stretched before theman indifferent house, standing low, and hemmed in by the barns andbuildings of a farm-yard.
Mary exclaimed, "Bless me!
here is Winthrop.
I declare I had no idea!
Well now, I think we had better turn back; I am excessively tired."
Henrietta, conscious and ashamed, and seeing no cousin Charleswalking along any path, or leaning against any gate, was readyto do as Mary wished; but "No!"
said Charles Musgrove, and "No, no!"
cried Louisa more eagerly, and taking her sister aside, seemed to bearguing the matter warmly.
Charles, in the meanwhile, was very decidedly declaring his resolutionof calling on his aunt, now that he was so near; and very evidently,though more fearfully, trying to induce his wife to go too.
But this was one of the points on which the lady shewed her strength;and when he recommended the advantage of resting herself a quarterof an hour at Winthrop, as she felt so tired, she resolutely answered,"Oh!
no, indeed!
walking up that hill again would do her more harmthan any sitting down could do her good;" and, in short,her look and manner declared, that go she would not.
After a little succession of these sort of debates and consultations,it was settled between Charles and his two sisters, that heand Henrietta should just run down for a few minutes, to see their auntand cousins, while the rest of the party waited for them at the topof the hill.
Louisa seemed the principal arranger of the plan;and, as she went a little way with them, down the hill, still talkingto Henrietta, Mary took the opportunity of looking scornfully around her,and saying to Captain Wentworth--"It is very unpleasant, having such connexions!
But, I assure you,I have never been in the house above twice in my life."
She received no other answer, than an artificial, assenting smile,followed by a contemptuous glance, as he turned away, which Anneperfectly knew the meaning of.
The brow of the hill, where they remained, was a cheerful spot:Louisa returned; and Mary, finding a comfortable seat for herselfon the step of a stile, was very well satisfied so long as the othersall stood about her; but when Louisa drew Captain Wentworth away,to try for a gleaning of nuts in an adjoining hedge-row,and they were gone by degrees quite out of sight and sound,Mary was happy no longer; she quarrelled with her own seat,was sure Louisa had got a much better somewhere, and nothing couldprevent her from going to look for a better also.
She turned throughthe same gate, but could not see them.
Anne found a nice seatfor her, on a dry sunny bank, under the hedge-row, in whichshe had no doubt of their still being, in some spot or other.
Mary sat down for a moment, but it would not do; she was sure Louisahad found a better seat somewhere else, and she would go ontill she overtook her.
Anne, really tired herself, was glad to sit down; and she very soon heardCaptain Wentworth and Louisa in the hedge-row, behind her, as ifmaking their way back along the rough, wild sort of channel, down thecentre.
They were speaking as they drew near.
Louisa's voice wasthe first distinguished.
She seemed to be in the middle of someeager speech.
What Anne first heard was--"And so, I made her go.
I could not bear that she should be frightenedfrom the visit by such nonsense.
What!
would I be turned back fromdoing a thing that I had determined to do, and that I knew to be right,by the airs and interference of such a person, or of any person I may say?
No, I have no idea of being so easily persuaded.
When I havemade up my mind, I have made it; and Henrietta seemed entirelyto have made up hers to call at Winthrop to-day; and yet, she was as neargiving it up, out of nonsensical complaisance!"
"She would have turned back then, but for you?"
"She would indeed.
I am almost ashamed to say it."
"Happy for her, to have such a mind as yours at hand!
After the hintsyou gave just now, which did but confirm my own observations,the last time I was in company with him,  I need not affectto have no comprehension of what is going on.
I see that more thana mere dutiful morning visit to your aunt was in question;and woe betide him, and her too, when it comes to things of consequence,when they are placed in circumstances requiring fortitude andstrength of mind, if she have not resolution enough to resistidle interference in such a trifle as this.
Your sister isan amiable creature; but yours is the character of decision and firmness,I see.
If you value her conduct or happiness, infuse as muchof your own spirit into her as you can.
But this, no doubt,you have been always doing.
It is the worst evil of too yieldingand indecisive a character, that no influence over it can be depended on.
You are never sure of a good impression being durable; everybodymay sway it.
Let those who would be happy be firm.
Here is a nut,"said he, catching one down from an upper bough.
"to exemplify:a beautiful glossy nut, which, blessed with original strength,has outlived all the storms of autumn.
Not a puncture, nota weak spot anywhere.
This nut," he continued, with playful solemnity,"while so many of his brethren have fallen and been trodden under foot,is still in possession of all the happiness that a hazel nut can besupposed capable of."
Then returning to his former earnest tone--"My first wish for all whom I am interested in, is that they should be firm.
If Louisa Musgrove would be beautiful and happy in her November of life,she will cherish all her present powers of mind."
He had done, and was unanswered.
It would have surprised Anne if Louisacould have readily answered such a speech:  words of such interest,spoken with such serious warmth!
She could imagine what Louisa was feeling.
For herself, she feared to move, lest she should be seen.
While she remained, a bush of low rambling holly protected her,and they were moving on.
Before they were beyond her hearing,however, Louisa spoke again.
"Mary is good-natured enough in many respects," said she;"but she does sometimes provoke me excessively, by her nonsenseand pride--the Elliot pride.
She has a great deal too muchof the Elliot pride.
We do so wish that Charles had married Anne instead.
I suppose you know he wanted to marry Anne?"
After a moment's pause, Captain Wentworth said--"Do you mean that she refused him?"
"Oh!
yes; certainly."
"When did that happen?"
"I do not exactly know, for Henrietta and I were at school at the time;but I believe about a year before he married Mary.
I wish she hadaccepted him.
We should all have liked her a great deal better;and papa and mamma always think it was her great friendLady Russell's doing, that she did not.
They think Charlesmight not be learned and bookish enough to please Lady Russell,and that therefore, she persuaded Anne to refuse him."
The sounds were retreating, and Anne distinguished no more.
Her own emotions still kept her fixed.
She had much to recover from,before she could move.
The listener's proverbial fate wasnot absolutely hers; she had heard no evil of herself, but she had hearda great deal of very painful import.
She saw how her own characterwas considered by Captain Wentworth, and there had been just that degreeof feeling and curiosity about her in his manner which must give herextreme agitation.
As soon as she could, she went after Mary, and having found,and walked back with her to their former station, by the stile,felt some comfort in their whole party being immediately afterwardscollected, and once more in motion together.
Her spirits wantedthe solitude and silence which only numbers could give.
Charles and Henrietta returned, bringing, as may be conjectured,Charles Hayter with them.
The minutiae of the business Annecould not attempt to understand; even Captain Wentworth did not seemadmitted to perfect confidence here; but that there had been a withdrawingon the gentleman's side, and a relenting on the lady's, and that theywere now very glad to be together again, did not admit a doubt.
Henrietta looked a little ashamed, but very well pleased;--Charles Hayter exceedingly happy:  and they were devoted to each otheralmost from the first instant of their all setting forward for Uppercross.
Everything now marked out Louisa for Captain Wentworth;nothing could be plainer; and where many divisions were necessary,or even where they were not, they walked side by side nearly as muchas the other two.
In a long strip of meadow land, where there wasample space for all, they were thus divided, forming three distinct parties;and to that party of the three which boasted least animation,and least complaisance, Anne necessarily belonged.
She joined Charlesand Mary, and was tired enough to be very glad of Charles's other arm;but Charles, though in very good humour with her, was out of temperwith his wife.
Mary had shewn herself disobliging to him,and was now to reap the consequence, which consequence washis dropping her arm almost every moment to cut off the headsof some nettles in the hedge with his switch; and when Mary beganto complain of it, and lament her being ill-used, according to custom,in being on the hedge side, while Anne was never incommoded on the other,he dropped the arms of both to hunt after a weasel which he hada momentary glance of, and they could hardly get him along at all.
This long meadow bordered a lane, which their footpath, at the end of itwas to cross, and when the party had all reached the gate of exit,the carriage advancing in the same direction, which had beensome time heard, was just coming up, and proved to be Admiral Croft's gig.
He and his wife had taken their intended drive, and were returning home.
Upon hearing how long a walk the young people had engaged in,they kindly offered a seat to any lady who might be particularly tired;it would save her a full mile, and they were going through Uppercross.
The invitation was general, and generally declined.
The Miss Musgroveswere not at all tired, and Mary was either offended, by not being askedbefore any of the others, or what Louisa called the Elliot pridecould not endure to make a third in a one horse chaise.
The walking party had crossed the lane, and were surmounting anopposite stile, and the Admiral was putting his horse in motion again,when Captain Wentworth cleared the hedge in a moment to say somethingto his sister.
The something might be guessed by its effects.
"Miss Elliot, I am sure you are tired," cried Mrs Croft.
"Do let us have the pleasure of taking you home.
Here is excellent roomfor three, I assure you.
If we were all like you, I believe we mightsit four.
You must, indeed, you must."
Anne was still in the lane; and though instinctively beginning to decline,she was not allowed to proceed.
The Admiral's kind urgencycame in support of his wife's; they would not be refused;they compressed themselves into the smallest possible spaceto leave her a corner, and Captain Wentworth, without saying a word,turned to her, and quietly obliged her to be assisted into the carriage.
Yes; he had done it.
She was in the carriage, and felt that he hadplaced her there, that his will and his hands had done it,that she owed it to his perception of her fatigue, and his resolutionto give her rest.
She was very much affected by the view ofhis disposition towards her, which all these things made apparent.
This little circumstance seemed the completion of all that had gone before.
She understood him.
He could not forgive her, but he could notbe unfeeling.
Though condemning her for the past, and considering itwith high and unjust resentment, though perfectly careless of her,and though becoming attached to another, still he could not see her suffer,without the desire of giving her relief.
It was a remainderof former sentiment; it was an impulse of pure, though unacknowledgedfriendship; it was a proof of his own warm and amiable heart,which she could not contemplate without emotions so compoundedof pleasure and pain, that she knew not which prevailed.
Her answers to the kindness and the remarks of her companionswere at first unconsciously given.
They had travelled half their wayalong the rough lane, before she was quite awake to what they said.
She then found them talking of "Frederick."
"He certainly means to have one or other of those two girls, Sophy,"said the Admiral; "but there is no saying which.
He has beenrunning after them, too, long enough, one would think, to make up his mind.
Ay, this comes of the peace.
If it were war now, he would havesettled it long ago.
We sailors, Miss Elliot, cannot afford to makelong courtships in time of war.
How many days was it, my dear,between the first time of my seeing you and our sitting down togetherin our lodgings at North Yarmouth?"
"We had better not talk about it, my dear," replied Mrs Croft, pleasantly;"for if Miss Elliot were to hear how soon we came to an understanding,she would never be persuaded that we could be happy together.
I had known you by character, however, long before."
"Well, and I had heard of you as a very pretty girl, and what were weto wait for besides?
I do not like having such things so long in hand.
I wish Frederick would spread a little more canvass, and bring us homeone of these young ladies to Kellynch.
Then there would alwaysbe company for them.
And very nice young ladies they both are;I hardly know one from the other."
"Very good humoured, unaffected girls, indeed," said Mrs Croft,in a tone of calmer praise, such as made Anne suspect thather keener powers might not consider either of them as quite worthyof her brother; "and a very respectable family.
One could not beconnected with better people.
My dear Admiral, that post!
we shall certainly take that post."
But by coolly giving the reins a better direction herself they happilypassed the danger; and by once afterwards judiciously putting outher hand they neither fell into a rut, nor ran foul of a dung-cart;and Anne, with some amusement at their style of driving,which she imagined no bad representation of the general guidanceof their affairs, found herself safely deposited by them at the Cottage.
Chapter 11The time now approached for Lady Russell's return:  the day was even fixed;and Anne, being engaged to join her as soon as she was resettled,was looking forward to an early removal to Kellynch, and beginningto think how her own comfort was likely to be affected by it.
It would place her in the same village with Captain Wentworth,within half a mile of him; they would have to frequent the same church,and there must be intercourse between the two families.
This was against her; but on the other hand, he spent so much of his timeat Uppercross, that in removing thence she might be considered ratheras leaving him behind, than as going towards him; and, upon the whole,she believed she must, on this interesting question, be the gainer,almost as certainly as in her change of domestic society,in leaving poor Mary for Lady Russell.
She wished it might be possible for her to avoid ever seeingCaptain Wentworth at the Hall:  those rooms had witnessedformer meetings which would be brought too painfully before her;but she was yet more anxious for the possibility of Lady Russell andCaptain Wentworth never meeting anywhere.
They did not like each other,and no renewal of acquaintance now could do any good; and were Lady Russellto see them together, she might think that he had too much self-possession,and she too little.
These points formed her chief solicitude in anticipatingher removal from Uppercross, where she felt she had been stationedquite long enough.
Her usefulness to little Charles would alwaysgive some sweetness to the memory of her two months' visit there,but he was gaining strength apace, and she had nothing else to stay for.
The conclusion of her visit, however, was diversified in a waywhich she had not at all imagined.
Captain Wentworth, after being unseenand unheard of at Uppercross for two whole days, appeared again among themto justify himself by a relation of what had kept him away.
A letter from his friend, Captain Harville, having found him out at last,had brought intelligence of Captain Harville's being settledwith his family at Lyme for the winter; of their being therefore,quite unknowingly, within twenty miles of each other.
Captain Harvillehad never been in good health since a severe wound which he receivedtwo years before, and Captain Wentworth's anxiety to see himhad determined him to go immediately to Lyme.
He had been therefor four-and-twenty hours.
His acquittal was complete,his friendship warmly honoured, a lively interest excited for his friend,and his description of the fine country about Lyme so feelingly attended toby the party, that an earnest desire to see Lyme themselves,and a project for going thither was the consequence.
The young people were all wild to see Lyme.
Captain Wentworth talkedof going there again himself, it was only seventeen miles from Uppercross;though November, the weather was by no means bad; and, in short,Louisa, who was the most eager of the eager, having formedthe resolution to go, and besides the pleasure of doing as she liked,being now armed with the idea of merit in maintaining her own way,bore down all the wishes of her father and mother for putting it offtill summer; and to Lyme they were to go--Charles, Mary, Anne, Henrietta,Louisa, and Captain Wentworth.
The first heedless scheme had been to go in the morning and return at night;but to this Mr Musgrove, for the sake of his horses, would not consent;and when it came to be rationally considered, a day inthe middle of November would not leave much time for seeing a new place,after deducting seven hours, as the nature of the country required,for going and returning.
They were, consequently, to stay the night there,and not to be expected back till the next day's dinner.
This was feltto be a considerable amendment; and though they all met at the Great Houseat rather an early breakfast hour, and set off very punctually,it was so much past noon before the two carriages, Mr Musgrove's coachcontaining the four ladies, and Charles's curricle, in whichhe drove Captain Wentworth, were descending the long hill into Lyme,and entering upon the still steeper street of the town itself,that it was very evident they would not have more than timefor looking about them, before the light and warmth of the day were gone.
After securing accommodations, and ordering a dinner at one of the inns,the next thing to be done was unquestionably to walk directlydown to the sea.
They were come too late in the year for any amusementor variety which Lyme, as a public place, might offer.
The roomswere shut up, the lodgers almost all gone, scarcely any familybut of the residents left; and, as there is nothing to admirein the buildings themselves, the remarkable situation of the town,the principal street almost hurrying into the water, the walk to the Cobb,skirting round the pleasant little bay, which, in the season,is animated with bathing machines and company; the Cobb itself,its old wonders and new improvements, with the very beautifulline of cliffs stretching out to the east of the town, are whatthe stranger's eye will seek; and a very strange stranger it must be,who does not see charms in the immediate environs of Lyme,to make him wish to know it better.
The scenes in its neighbourhood,Charmouth, with its high grounds and extensive sweeps of country,and still more, its sweet, retired bay, backed by dark cliffs,where fragments of low rock among the sands, make it the happiest spotfor watching the flow of the tide, for sitting in unwearied contemplation;the woody varieties of the cheerful village of Up Lyme; and, above all,Pinny, with its green chasms between romantic rocks, wherethe scattered forest trees and orchards of luxuriant growth,declare that many a generation must have passed away since the firstpartial falling of the cliff prepared the ground for such a state,where a scene so wonderful and so lovely is exhibited, as maymore than equal any of the resembling scenes of the far-famedIsle of Wight:  these places must be visited, and visited again,to make the worth of Lyme understood.
The party from Uppercross passing down by the now desertedand melancholy looking rooms, and still descending, soon found themselveson the sea-shore; and lingering only, as all must linger and gazeon a first return to the sea, who ever deserved to look on it at all,proceeded towards the Cobb, equally their object in itselfand on Captain Wentworth's account:  for in a small house,near the foot of an old pier of unknown date, were the Harvilles settled.
Captain Wentworth turned in to call on his friend; the others walked on,and he was to join them on the Cobb.
They were by no means tired of wondering and admiring; and not even Louisaseemed to feel that they had parted with Captain Wentworth long,when they saw him coming after them, with three companions,all well known already, by description, to be Captain and Mrs Harville,and a Captain Benwick, who was staying with them.
Captain Benwick had some time ago been first lieutenant of the Laconia;and the account which Captain Wentworth had given of him,on his return from Lyme before, his warm praise of him asan excellent young man and an officer, whom he had always valued highly,which must have stamped him well in the esteem of every listener,had been followed by a little history of his private life,which rendered him perfectly interesting in the eyes of all the ladies.
He had been engaged to Captain Harville's sister, and was nowmourning her loss.
They had been a year or two waiting for fortuneand promotion.
Fortune came, his prize-money as lieutenant being great;promotion, too, came at last; but Fanny Harville did not live to know it.
She had died the preceding summer while he was at sea.
Captain Wentworthbelieved it impossible for man to be more attached to womanthan poor Benwick had been to Fanny Harville, or to be more deeplyafflicted under the dreadful change.
He considered his dispositionas of the sort which must suffer heavily, uniting very strong feelingswith quiet, serious, and retiring manners, and a decided taste for reading,and sedentary pursuits.
To finish the interest of the story,the friendship between him and the Harvilles seemed, if possible,augmented by the event which closed all their views of alliance,and Captain Benwick was now living with them entirely.
Captain Harvillehad taken his present house for half a year; his taste, and his health,and his fortune, all directing him to a residence inexpensive,and by the sea; and the grandeur of the country, and the retirementof Lyme in the winter, appeared exactly adapted to Captain Benwick'sstate of mind.
The sympathy and good-will excited towards Captain Benwickwas very great.
"And yet," said Anne to herself, as they now moved forwardto meet the party, "he has not, perhaps, a more sorrowing heartthan I have.
I cannot believe his prospects so blighted for ever.
He is younger than I am; younger in feeling, if not in fact;younger as a man.
He will rally again, and be happy with another."
They all met, and were introduced.
Captain Harville was a tall,dark man, with a sensible, benevolent countenance; a little lame;and from strong features and want of health, looking much olderthan Captain Wentworth.
Captain Benwick looked, and was,the youngest of the three, and, compared with either of them,a little man.
He had a pleasing face and a melancholy air,just as he ought to have, and drew back from conversation.
Captain Harville, though not equalling Captain Wentworth in manners,was a perfect gentleman, unaffected, warm, and obliging.
Mrs Harville, a degree less polished than her husband, seemed, however,to have the same good feelings; and nothing could be more pleasantthan their desire of considering the whole party as friends of their own,because the friends of Captain Wentworth, or more kindly hospitablethan their entreaties for their all promising to dine with them.
The dinner, already ordered at the inn, was at last, though unwillingly,accepted as a excuse; but they seemed almost hurt that Captain Wentworthshould have brought any such party to Lyme, without considering itas a thing of course that they should dine with them.
There was so much attachment to Captain Wentworth in all this,and such a bewitching charm in a degree of hospitality so uncommon,so unlike the usual style of give-and-take invitations, and dinnersof formality and display, that Anne felt her spirits not likely to bebenefited by an increasing acquaintance among his brother-officers.
"These would have been all my friends," was her thought;and she had to struggle against a great tendency to lowness.
On quitting the Cobb, they all went in-doors with their new friends,and found rooms so small as none but those who invite from the heartcould think capable of accommodating so many.
Anne hada moment's astonishment on the subject herself; but it was soon lostin the pleasanter feelings which sprang from the sight of allthe ingenious contrivances and nice arrangements of Captain Harville,to turn the actual space to the best account, to supply the deficienciesof lodging-house furniture, and defend the windows and doorsagainst the winter storms to be expected.
The varieties inthe fitting-up of the rooms, where the common necessariesprovided by the owner, in the common indifferent plight,were contrasted with some few articles of a rare species of wood,excellently worked up, and with something curious and valuablefrom all the distant countries Captain Harville had visited,were more than amusing to Anne; connected as it all was with his profession,the fruit of its labours, the effect of its influence on his habits,the picture of repose and domestic happiness it presented,made it to her a something more, or less, than gratification.
Captain Harville was no reader; but he had contrivedexcellent accommodations, and fashioned very pretty shelves,for a tolerable collection of well-bound volumes, the property ofCaptain Benwick.
His lameness prevented him from taking much exercise;but a mind of usefulness and ingenuity seemed to furnish him withconstant employment within.
He drew, he varnished, he carpentered,he glued; he made toys for the children; he fashioned new netting-needlesand pins with improvements; and if everything else was done,sat down to his large fishing-net at one corner of the room.
Anne thought she left great happiness behind her when theyquitted the house; and Louisa, by whom she found herself walking,burst forth into raptures of admiration and delight on the characterof the navy; their friendliness, their brotherliness, their openness,their uprightness; protesting that she was convinced of sailors havingmore worth and warmth than any other set of men in England;that they only knew how to live, and they only deserved to berespected and loved.
They went back to dress and dine; and so well had the schemeanswered already, that nothing was found amiss; though its being"so entirely out of season," and the "no thoroughfare of Lyme,"and the "no expectation of company," had brought many apologiesfrom the heads of the inn.
Anne found herself by this time growing so much more hardenedto being in Captain Wentworth's company than she had at first imaginedcould ever be, that the sitting down to the same table with him now,and the interchange of the common civilities attending on it(they never got beyond), was become a mere nothing.
The nights were too dark for the ladies to meet again till the morrow,but Captain Harville had promised them a visit in the evening;and he came, bringing his friend also, which was more thanhad been expected, it having been agreed that Captain Benwickhad all the appearance of being oppressed by the presence ofso many strangers.
He ventured among them again, however,though his spirits certainly did not seem fit for the mirthof the party in general.
While Captains Wentworth and Harville led the talk on one side of the room,and by recurring to former days, supplied anecdotes in abundanceto occupy and entertain the others, it fell to Anne's lot to be placedrather apart with Captain Benwick; and a very good impulseof her nature obliged her to begin an acquaintance with him.
He was shy, and disposed to abstraction; but the engaging mildness ofher countenance, and gentleness of her manners, soon had their effect;and Anne was well repaid the first trouble of exertion.
He was evidently a young man of considerable taste in reading,though principally in poetry; and besides the persuasion of havinggiven him at least an evening's indulgence in the discussion of subjects,which his usual companions had probably no concern in, she had the hopeof being of real use to him in some suggestions as to the duty andbenefit of struggling against affliction, which had naturally grown outof their conversation.
For, though shy, he did not seem reserved;it had rather the appearance of feelings glad to burst theirusual restraints; and having talked of poetry, the richness ofthe present age, and gone through a brief comparison of opinionas to the first-rate poets, trying to ascertain whether Marmionor The Lady of the Lake were to be preferred, and how ranked the Giaourand The Bride of Abydos; and moreover, how the Giaour was to be pronounced,he showed himself so intimately acquainted with all the tenderest songsof the one poet, and all the impassioned descriptions of hopeless agonyof the other; he repeated, with such tremulous feeling, the various lineswhich imaged a broken heart, or a mind destroyed by wretchedness,and looked so entirely as if he meant to be understood,that she ventured to hope he did not always read only poetry,and to say, that she thought it was the misfortune of poetry to beseldom safely enjoyed by those who enjoyed it completely;and that the strong feelings which alone could estimate it trulywere the very feelings which ought to taste it but sparingly.
His looks shewing him not pained, but pleased with this allusionto his situation, she was emboldened to go on; and feeling in herselfthe right of seniority of mind, she ventured to recommenda larger allowance of prose in his daily study; and on being requestedto particularize, mentioned such works of our best moralists,such collections of the finest letters, such memoirs of charactersof worth and suffering, as occurred to her at the momentas calculated to rouse and fortify the mind by the highest precepts,and the strongest examples of moral and religious endurances.
Captain Benwick listened attentively, and seemed grateful forthe interest implied; and though with a shake of the head,and sighs which declared his little faith in the efficacy of any bookson grief like his, noted down the names of those she recommended,and promised to procure and read them.
When the evening was over, Anne could not but be amused at the ideaof her coming to Lyme to preach patience and resignation to a young manwhom she had never seen before; nor could she help fearing,on more serious reflection, that, like many other great moralistsand preachers, she had been eloquent on a point in which her own conductwould ill bear examination.
Chapter 12Anne and Henrietta, finding themselves the earliest of the partythe next morning, agreed to stroll down to the sea before breakfast.
They went to the sands, to watch the flowing of the tide,which a fine south-easterly breeze was bringing in with all the grandeurwhich so flat a shore admitted.
They praised the morning;gloried in the sea; sympathized in the delight of the fresh-feelingbreeze--and were silent; till Henrietta suddenly began again with--"Oh!
yes,--I am quite convinced that, with very few exceptions,the sea-air always does good.
There can be no doubt of its having beenof the greatest service to Dr Shirley, after his illness,last spring twelve-month.
He declares himself, that coming to Lymefor a month, did him more good than all the medicine he took;and, that being by the sea, always makes him feel young again.
Now, I cannot help thinking it a pity that he does not liveentirely by the sea.
I do think he had better leave Uppercross entirely,and fix at Lyme.
Do not you, Anne?
Do not you agree with me,that it is the best thing he could do, both for himself and Mrs Shirley?
She has cousins here, you know, and many acquaintance, which wouldmake it cheerful for her, and I am sure she would be gladto get to a place where she could have medical attendance at hand,in case of his having another seizure.
Indeed I think it quite melancholyto have such excellent people as Dr and Mrs Shirley, who have beendoing good all their lives, wearing out their last days in a placelike Uppercross, where, excepting our family, they seem shut outfrom all the world.
I wish his friends would propose it to him.
I really think they ought.
And, as to procuring a dispensation,there could be no difficulty at his time of life, and with his character.
My only doubt is, whether anything could persuade him to leave his parish.
He is so very strict and scrupulous in his notions; over-scrupulousI must say.
Do not you think, Anne, it is being over-scrupulous?
Do not you think it is quite a mistaken point of conscience,when a clergyman sacrifices his health for the sake of duties,which may be just as well performed by another person?
And at Lyme too,only seventeen miles off, he would be near enough to hear,if people thought there was anything to complain of."
Anne smiled more than once to herself during this speech,and entered into the subject, as ready to do good by entering intothe feelings of a young lady as of a young man, though here it was goodof a lower standard, for what could be offered but general acquiescence?
She said all that was reasonable and proper on the business;felt the claims of Dr Shirley to repose as she ought; saw how verydesirable it was that he should have some active, respectable young man,as a resident curate, and was even courteous enough to hint atthe advantage of such resident curate's being married.
"I wish," said Henrietta, very well pleased with her companion,"I wish Lady Russell lived at Uppercross, and were intimatewith Dr Shirley.
I have always heard of Lady Russell as a woman ofthe greatest influence with everybody!
I always look upon her as ableto persuade a person to anything!
I am afraid of her, as I havetold you before, quite afraid of her, because she is so very clever;but I respect her amazingly, and wish we had such a neighbourat Uppercross."
Anne was amused by Henrietta's manner of being grateful,and amused also that the course of events and the new interestsof Henrietta's views should have placed her friend at all in favourwith any of the Musgrove family; she had only time, however,for a general answer, and a wish that such another womanwere at Uppercross, before all subjects suddenly ceased,on seeing Louisa and Captain Wentworth coming towards them.
They came also for a stroll till breakfast was likely to be ready;but Louisa recollecting, immediately afterwards that she had somethingto procure at a shop, invited them all to go back with her into the town.
They were all at her disposal.
When they came to the steps, leading upwards from the beach, a gentleman,at the same moment preparing to come down, politely drew back,and stopped to give them way.
They ascended and passed him;and as they passed, Anne's face caught his eye, and he looked at herwith a degree of earnest admiration, which she could not be insensible of.
She was looking remarkably well; her very regular, very pretty features,having the bloom and freshness of youth restored by the fine windwhich had been blowing on her complexion, and by the animation of eyewhich it had also produced.
It was evident that the gentleman,(completely a gentleman in manner) admired her exceedingly.
Captain Wentworth looked round at her instantly in a way whichshewed his noticing of it.
He gave her a momentary glance,a glance of brightness, which seemed to say, "That man is struck with you,and even I, at this moment, see something like Anne Elliot again."
After attending Louisa through her business, and loitering abouta little longer, they returned to the inn; and Anne, in passing afterwardsquickly from her own chamber to their dining-room, had nearly run againstthe very same gentleman, as he came out of an adjoining apartment.
She had before conjectured him to be a stranger like themselves,and determined that a well-looking groom, who was strolling aboutnear the two inns as they came back, should be his servant.
Both master and man being in mourning assisted the idea.
It was now proved that he belonged to the same inn as themselves;and this second meeting, short as it was, also proved againby the gentleman's looks, that he thought hers very lovely,and by the readiness and propriety of his apologies, that he wasa man of exceedingly good manners.
He seemed about thirty,and though not handsome, had an agreeable person.
Anne felt thatshe should like to know who he was.
They had nearly done breakfast, when the sound of a carriage,(almost the first they had heard since entering Lyme) drew half the partyto the window.
It was a gentleman's carriage, a curricle,but only coming round from the stable-yard to the front door;somebody must be going away.
It was driven by a servant in mourning.
The word curricle made Charles Musgrove jump up that he mightcompare it with his own; the servant in mourning roused Anne's curiosity,and the whole six were collected to look, by the time the ownerof the curricle was to be seen issuing from the door amidst the bowsand civilities of the household, and taking his seat, to drive off.
"Ah!"
cried Captain Wentworth, instantly, and with half a glance at Anne,"it is the very man we passed."
The Miss Musgroves agreed to it; and having all kindly watched himas far up the hill as they could, they returned to the breakfast table.
The waiter came into the room soon afterwards.
"Pray," said Captain Wentworth, immediately, "can you tell us the nameof the gentleman who is just gone away?"
"Yes, Sir, a Mr Elliot, a gentleman of large fortune, came in last nightfrom Sidmouth.
Dare say you heard the carriage, sir, while you wereat dinner; and going on now for Crewkherne, in his way to Bathand London."
"Elliot!"
Many had looked on each other, and many had repeated the name,before all this had been got through, even by the smart rapidityof a waiter.
"Bless me!"
cried Mary; "it must be our cousin; it must be our Mr Elliot,it must, indeed!
Charles, Anne, must not it?
In mourning, you see,just as our Mr Elliot must be.
How very extraordinary!
In the very same inn with us!
Anne, must not it be our Mr Elliot?
my father's next heir?
Pray sir," turning to the waiter,"did not you hear, did not his servant say whether he belongedto the Kellynch family?"
"No, ma'am, he did not mention no particular family; but he saidhis master was a very rich gentleman, and would be a baronight some day."
"There!
you see!"
cried Mary in an ecstasy, "just as I said!
Heir to Sir Walter Elliot!
I was sure that would come out,if it was so.
Depend upon it, that is a circumstance which his servantstake care to publish, wherever he goes.
But, Anne, only conceivehow extraordinary!
I wish I had looked at him more.
I wish we hadbeen aware in time, who it was, that he might have been introduced to us.
What a pity that we should not have been introduced to each other!
Do you think he had the Elliot countenance?
I hardly looked at him,I was looking at the horses; but I think he had somethingof the Elliot countenance, I wonder the arms did not strike me!
Oh!
the great-coat was hanging over the panel, and hid the arms,so it did; otherwise, I am sure, I should have observed them,and the livery too; if the servant had not been in mourning,one should have known him by the livery."
"Putting all these very extraordinary circumstances together,"said Captain Wentworth, "we must consider it to be the arrangementof Providence, that you should not be introduced to your cousin."
When she could command Mary's attention, Anne quietly triedto convince her that their father and Mr Elliot had not, for many years,been on such terms as to make the power of attempting an introductionat all desirable.
At the same time, however, it was a secret gratification to herselfto have seen her cousin, and to know that the future owner of Kellynchwas undoubtedly a gentleman, and had an air of good sense.
She would not, upon any account, mention her having met with himthe second time; luckily Mary did not much attend to their havingpassed close by him in their earlier walk, but she would have feltquite ill-used by Anne's having actually run against him in the passage,and received his very polite excuses, while she had never beennear him at all; no, that cousinly little interview must remaina perfect secret.
"Of course," said Mary, "you will mention our seeing Mr Elliot,the next time you write to Bath.
I think my father certainlyought to hear of it; do mention all about him."
Anne avoided a direct reply, but it was just the circumstancewhich she considered as not merely unnecessary to be communicated,but as what ought to be suppressed.
The offence which had been givenher father, many years back, she knew; Elizabeth's particular share in itshe suspected; and that Mr Elliot's idea always produced irritation in bothwas beyond a doubt.
Mary never wrote to Bath herself; all the toilof keeping up a slow and unsatisfactory correspondence with Elizabethfell on Anne.
Breakfast had not been long over, when they were joined by Captainand Mrs Harville and Captain Benwick; with whom they had appointedto take their last walk about Lyme.
They ought to be setting offfor Uppercross by one, and in the mean while were to be all together,and out of doors as long as they could.
Anne found Captain Benwick getting near her, as soon as they were allfairly in the street.
Their conversation the preceding eveningdid not disincline him to seek her again; and they walked togethersome time, talking as before of Mr Scott and Lord Byron,and still as unable as before, and as unable as any other two readers,to think exactly alike of the merits of either, till somethingoccasioned an almost general change amongst their party, and instead ofCaptain Benwick, she had Captain Harville by her side.
"Miss Elliot," said he, speaking rather low, "you have done a good deedin making that poor fellow talk so much.
I wish he could havesuch company oftener.
It is bad for him, I know, to be shut up as he is;but what can we do?
We cannot part."
"No," said Anne, "that I can easily believe to be impossible;but in time, perhaps--we know what time does in every case of affliction,and you must remember, Captain Harville, that your friendmay yet be called a young mourner--only last summer, I understand."
"Ay, true enough," (with a deep sigh) "only June."
"And not known to him, perhaps, so soon."
"Not till the first week of August, when he came home from the Cape,just made into the Grappler.
I was at Plymouth dreading to hear of him;he sent in letters, but the Grappler was under orders for Portsmouth.
There the news must follow him, but who was to tell it?
not I.I would as soon have been run up to the yard-arm.
Nobody could do it,but that good fellow" (pointing to Captain Wentworth.)
"The Laconiahad come into Plymouth the week before; no danger of herbeing sent to sea again.
He stood his chance for the rest;wrote up for leave of absence, but without waiting the return,travelled night and day till he got to Portsmouth, rowed offto the Grappler that instant, and never left the poor fellow for a week.
That's what he did, and nobody else could have saved poor James.
You may think, Miss Elliot, whether he is dear to us!"
Anne did think on the question with perfect decision, and said as muchin reply as her own feeling could accomplish, or as his seemedable to bear, for he was too much affected to renew the subject,and when he spoke again, it was of something totally different.
Mrs Harville's giving it as her opinion that her husband would havequite walking enough by the time he reached home, determined the directionof all the party in what was to be their last walk; they wouldaccompany them to their door, and then return and set off themselves.
By all their calculations there was just time for this; but as they drewnear the Cobb, there was such a general wish to walk along it once more,all were so inclined, and Louisa soon grew so determined,that the difference of a quarter of an hour, it was found,would be no difference at all; so with all the kind leave-taking,and all the kind interchange of invitations and promises whichmay be imagined, they parted from Captain and Mrs Harvilleat their own door, and still accompanied by Captain Benwick,who seemed to cling to them to the last, proceeded to makethe proper adieus to the Cobb.
Anne found Captain Benwick again drawing near her.
Lord Byron's"dark blue seas" could not fail of being brought forward bytheir present view, and she gladly gave him all her attention as long asattention was possible.
It was soon drawn, perforce another way.
There was too much wind to make the high part of the new Cobb pleasantfor the ladies, and they agreed to get down the steps to the lower,and all were contented to pass quietly and carefully down the steep flight,excepting Louisa; she must be jumped down them by Captain Wentworth.
In all their walks, he had had to jump her from the stiles;the sensation was delightful to her.
The hardness of the pavementfor her feet, made him less willing upon the present occasion;he did it, however.
She was safely down, and instantly,to show her enjoyment, ran up the steps to be jumped down again.
He advised her against it, thought the jar too great; but no,he reasoned and talked in vain, she smiled and said, "I am determinedI will:" he put out his hands; she was too precipitate by half a second,she fell on the pavement on the Lower Cobb, and was taken up lifeless!
There was no wound, no blood, no visible bruise; but her eyes were closed,she breathed not, her face was like death.
The horror of the momentto all who stood around!
Captain Wentworth, who had caught her up, knelt with her in his arms,looking on her with a face as pallid as her own, in an agony of silence.
"She is dead!
she is dead!"
screamed Mary, catching hold of herhusband, and contributing with his own horror to make him immoveable;and in another moment, Henrietta, sinking under the conviction, losther senses too, and would have fallen on the steps, but for CaptainBenwick and Anne, who caught and supported her between them.
"Is there no one to help me?"
were the first words whichburst from Captain Wentworth, in a tone of despair, and as ifall his own strength were gone.
"Go to him, go to him," cried Anne, "for heaven's sake go to him.
I can support her myself.
Leave me, and go to him.
Rub her hands,rub her temples; here are salts; take them, take them."
Captain Benwick obeyed, and Charles at the same moment,disengaging himself from his wife, they were both with him;and Louisa was raised up and supported more firmly between them,and everything was done that Anne had prompted, but in vain;while Captain Wentworth, staggering against the wall for his support,exclaimed in the bitterest agony--"Oh God!
her father and mother!"
"A surgeon!"
said Anne.
He caught the word; it seemed to rouse him at once, and saying only--"True, true, a surgeon this instant," was darting away,when Anne eagerly suggested--"Captain Benwick, would not it be better for Captain Benwick?
He knows where a surgeon is to be found."
Every one capable of thinking felt the advantage of the idea,and in a moment (it was all done in rapid moments) Captain Benwick hadresigned the poor corpse-like  figure entirely to the brother's care,and was off for the town with the utmost rapidity.
As to the wretched party left behind, it could scarcely be saidwhich of the three, who were completely rational, was suffering most:Captain Wentworth, Anne, or Charles, who, really a very affectionatebrother, hung over Louisa with sobs of grief, and could only turn his eyesfrom one sister, to see the other in a state as insensible,or to witness the hysterical agitations of his wife, calling on himfor help which he could not give.
Anne, attending with all the strength and zeal, and thought,which instinct supplied, to Henrietta, still tried, at intervals,to suggest comfort to the others, tried to quiet Mary, to animate Charles,to assuage the feelings of Captain Wentworth.
Both seemed to look to herfor directions.
"Anne, Anne," cried Charles, "What is to be done next?
What, in heaven's name, is to be done next?"
Captain Wentworth's eyes were also turned towards her.
"Had not she better be carried to the inn?
Yes, I am sure:carry her gently to the inn."
"Yes, yes, to the inn," repeated Captain Wentworth, comparativelycollected, and eager to be doing something.
"I will carry her myself.
Musgrove, take care of the others."
By this time the report of the accident had spread among the workmenand boatmen about the Cobb, and many were collected near them,to be useful if wanted, at any rate, to enjoy the sight ofa dead young lady, nay, two dead young ladies, for it proved twice as fineas the first report.
To some of the best-looking of these good peopleHenrietta was consigned, for, though partially revived,she was quite helpless; and in this manner, Anne walking by her side,and Charles attending to his wife, they set forward, treading backwith feelings unutterable, the ground, which so lately, so very lately,and so light of heart, they had passed along.
They were not off the Cobb, before the Harvilles met them.
Captain Benwick had been seen flying by their house, with a countenancewhich showed something to be wrong; and they had set off immediately,informed and directed as they passed, towards the spot.
Shocked as Captain Harville was, he brought senses and nervesthat could be instantly useful; and a look between him and his wifedecided what was to be done.
She must be taken to their house;all must go to their house; and await the surgeon's arrival there.
They would not listen to scruples:  he was obeyed; they were allbeneath his roof; and while Louisa, under Mrs Harville's direction,was conveyed up stairs, and given possession of her own bed,assistance, cordials, restoratives were supplied by her husbandto all who needed them.
Louisa had once opened her eyes, but soon closed them again,without apparent consciousness.
This had been a proof of life,however, of service to her sister; and Henrietta, though perfectlyincapable of being in the same room with Louisa, was kept,by the agitation of hope and fear, from a return of her own insensibility.
Mary, too, was growing calmer.
The surgeon was with them almost before it had seemed possible.
They were sick with horror, while he examined; but he was not hopeless.
The head had received a severe contusion, but he had seen greater injuriesrecovered from:  he was by no means hopeless; he spoke cheerfully.
That he did not regard it as a desperate case, that he did not saya few hours must end it, was at first felt, beyond the hope of most;and the ecstasy of such a reprieve, the rejoicing, deep and silent,after a few fervent ejaculations of gratitude to Heaven had been offered,may be conceived.
The tone, the look, with which "Thank God!"
was utteredby Captain Wentworth, Anne was sure could never be forgotten by her;nor the sight of him afterwards, as he sat near a table, leaning over itwith folded arms and face concealed, as if overpowered bythe various feelings of his soul, and trying by prayer and reflectionto calm them.
Louisa's limbs had escaped.
There was no injury but to the head.
It now became necessary for the party to consider what was best to be done,as to their general situation.
They were now able to speak to each otherand consult.
That Louisa must remain where she was, however distressingto her friends to be involving the Harvilles in such trouble,did not admit a doubt.
Her removal was impossible.
The Harvillessilenced all scruples; and, as much as they could, all gratitude.
They had looked forward and arranged everything before the othersbegan to reflect.
Captain Benwick must give up his room to them,and get another bed elsewhere; and the whole was settled.
They were only concerned that the house could accommodate no more;and yet perhaps, by "putting the children away in the maid's room,or swinging a cot somewhere," they could hardly bear to think of notfinding room for two or three besides, supposing they might wish to stay;though, with regard to any attendance on Miss Musgrove, there need not bethe least uneasiness in leaving her to Mrs Harville's care entirely.
Mrs Harville was a very experienced nurse, and her nursery-maid,who had lived with her long, and gone about with her everywhere,was just such another.
Between these two, she could wantno possible attendance by day or night.
And all this was saidwith a truth and sincerity of feeling irresistible.
Charles, Henrietta, and Captain Wentworth were the three in consultation,and for a little while it was only an interchange of perplexity and terror.
"Uppercross, the necessity of some one's going to Uppercross;the news to be conveyed; how it could be broken to Mr and Mrs Musgrove;the lateness of the morning; an hour already gone since theyought to have been off; the impossibility of being in tolerable time."
At first, they were capable of nothing more to the purposethan such exclamations; but, after a while, Captain Wentworth,exerting himself, said--"We must be decided, and without the loss of another minute.
Every minute is valuable.
Some one must resolve on being offfor Uppercross instantly.
Musgrove, either you or I must go."
Charles agreed, but declared his resolution of not going away.
He would be as little incumbrance as possible to Captain and Mrs Harville;but as to leaving his sister in such a state, he neither ought, nor would.
So far it was decided; and Henrietta at first declared the same.
She, however, was soon persuaded to think differently.
The usefulnessof her staying!
She who had not been able to remain in Louisa's room,or to look at her, without sufferings which made her worse than helpless!
She was forced to acknowledge that she could do no good,yet was still unwilling to be away, till, touched by the thoughtof her father and mother, she gave it up; she consented,she was anxious to be at home.
The plan had reached this point, when Anne, coming quietlydown from Louisa's room, could not but hear what followed,for the parlour door was open.
"Then it is settled, Musgrove," cried Captain Wentworth,"that you stay, and that I take care of your sister home.
But as to the rest, as to the others, if one stays to assist Mrs Harville,I think it need be only one.
Mrs Charles Musgrove will, of course,wish to get back to her children; but if Anne will stay, no one so proper,so capable as Anne."
She paused a moment to recover from the emotion of hearing herselfso spoken of.
The other two warmly agreed with what he said,and she then appeared.
"You will stay, I am sure; you will stay and nurse her;" cried he,turning to her and speaking with a glow, and yet a gentleness,which seemed almost restoring the past.
She coloured deeply,and he recollected himself and moved away.
She expressed herselfmost willing, ready, happy to remain.
"It was what she had beenthinking of, and wishing to be allowed to do.
A bed on the floorin Louisa's room would be sufficient for her, if Mrs Harvillewould but think so."
One thing more, and all seemed arranged.
Though it was rather desirablethat Mr and Mrs Musgrove should be previously alarmed by someshare of delay; yet the time required by the Uppercross horsesto take them back, would be a dreadful extension of suspense;and Captain Wentworth proposed, and Charles Musgrove agreed,that it would be much better for him to take a chaise from the inn,and leave Mr Musgrove's carriage and horses to be sent homethe next morning early, when there would be the farther advantageof sending an account of Louisa's night.
Captain Wentworth now hurried off to get everything ready on his part,and to be soon followed by the two ladies.
When the plan wasmade known to Mary, however, there was an end of all peace in it.
She was so wretched and so vehement, complained so much of injusticein being expected to go away instead of Anne; Anne, who wasnothing to Louisa, while she was her sister, and had the best rightto stay in Henrietta's stead!
Why was not she to be as useful as Anne?
And to go home without Charles, too, without her husband!
No, it was too unkind.
And in short, she said more than her husbandcould long withstand, and as none of the others could opposewhen he gave way, there was no help for it; the change of Mary for Annewas inevitable.
Anne had never submitted more reluctantly to the jealousand ill-judging claims of Mary; but so it must be, and they set offfor the town, Charles taking care of his sister, and Captain Benwickattending to her.
She gave a moment's recollection, as they hurried along,to the little circumstances which the same spots had witnessedearlier in the morning.
There she had listened to Henrietta's schemesfor Dr Shirley's leaving Uppercross; farther on, she hadfirst seen Mr Elliot; a moment seemed all that could now be givento any one but Louisa, or those who were wrapt up in her welfare.
Captain Benwick was most considerately attentive to her; and,united as they all seemed by the distress of the day, she feltan increasing degree of good-will towards him, and a pleasure evenin thinking that it might, perhaps, be the occasion of continuingtheir acquaintance.
Captain Wentworth was on the watch for them, and a chaise and four in waiting,stationed for their convenience in the lowest part of the street;but his evident surprise and vexation at the substitution of one sisterfor the other, the change in his countenance, the astonishment,the expressions begun and suppressed, with which Charles was listened to,made but a mortifying reception of Anne; or must at least convince herthat she was valued only as she could be useful to Louisa.
She endeavoured to be composed, and to be just.
Without emulatingthe feelings of an Emma towards her Henry, she would haveattended on Louisa with a zeal above the common claims of regard,for his sake; and she hoped he would not long be so unjustas to suppose she would shrink unnecessarily from the office of a friend.
In the mean while she was in the carriage.
He had handed them both in,and placed himself between them; and in this manner, under thesecircumstances, full of astonishment and emotion to Anne, she quitted Lyme.
How the long stage would pass; how it was to affect their manners;what was to be their sort of intercourse, she could not foresee.
It was all quite natural, however.
He was devoted to Henrietta;always turning towards her; and when he spoke at all, always with the viewof supporting her hopes and raising her spirits.
In general,his voice and manner were studiously calm.
To spare Henriettafrom agitation seemed the governing principle.
Once only,when she had been grieving over the last ill-judged, ill-fatedwalk to the Cobb, bitterly lamenting that it ever had been thought of,he burst forth, as if wholly overcome--"Don't talk of it, don't talk of it," he cried.
"Oh God!
that I hadnot given way to her at the fatal moment!
Had I done as I ought!
But so eager and so resolute!
Dear, sweet Louisa!"
Anne wondered whether it ever occurred to him now, to question the justnessof his own previous opinion as to the universal felicity and advantageof firmness of character; and whether it might not strike him that,like all other qualities of the mind, it should have its proportionsand limits.
She thought it could scarcely escape him to feelthat a persuadable temper might sometimes be as much in favour of happinessas a very resolute character.
They got on fast.
Anne was astonished to recognise the same hillsand the same objects so soon.
Their actual speed, heightened bysome dread of the conclusion, made the road appear but half as longas on the day before.
It was growing quite dusk, however,before they were in the neighbourhood of Uppercross, and there had beentotal silence among them for some time, Henrietta leaning backin the corner, with a shawl over her face, giving the hope of herhaving cried herself to sleep; when, as they were going up their last hill,Anne found herself all at once addressed by Captain Wentworth.
In a low, cautious voice, he said: --"I have been considering what we had best do.
She must notappear at first.
She could not stand it.
I have been thinking whetheryou had not better remain in the carriage with her, while I go inand break it to Mr and Mrs Musgrove.
Do you think this is a good plan?"
She did:  he was satisfied, and said no more.
But the remembranceof the appeal remained a pleasure to her, as a proof of friendship,and of deference for her judgement, a great pleasure; and when it becamea sort of parting proof, its value did not lessen.
When the distressing communication at Uppercross was over,and he had seen the father and mother quite as composed as could be hoped,and the daughter all the better for being with them, he announcedhis intention of returning in the same carriage to Lyme;and when the horses were baited, he was off.
(End of volume one.)
Chapter 13The remainder of Anne's time at Uppercross, comprehending only two days,was spent entirely at the Mansion House; and she had the satisfactionof knowing herself extremely useful there, both as an immediate companion,and as assisting in all those arrangements for the future, which,in Mr and Mrs Musgrove's distressed state of spirits, would havebeen difficulties.
They had an early account from Lyme the next morning.
Louisa wasmuch the same.
No symptoms worse than before had appeared.
Charles came a few hours afterwards, to bring a later andmore particular account.
He was tolerably cheerful.
A speedy curemust not be hoped, but everything was going on as wellas the nature of the case admitted.
In speaking of the Harvilles,he seemed unable to satisfy his own sense of their kindness,especially of Mrs Harville's exertions as a nurse.
"She really leftnothing for Mary to do.
He and Mary had been persuaded to go earlyto their inn last night.
Mary had been hysterical again this morning.
When he came away, she was going to walk out with Captain Benwick,which, he hoped, would do her good.
He almost wished she had beenprevailed on to come home the day before; but the truth was,that Mrs Harville left nothing for anybody to do."
Charles was to return to Lyme the same afternoon, and his fatherhad at first half a mind to go with him, but the ladies could not consent.
It would be going only to multiply trouble to the others,and increase his own distress; and a much better scheme followedand was acted upon.
A chaise was sent for from Crewkherne,and Charles conveyed back a far more useful person in the old nursery-maidof the family, one who having brought up all the children,and seen the very last, the lingering and long-petted Master Harry,sent to school after his brothers, was now living in her deserted nurseryto mend stockings and dress all the blains and bruises she couldget near her, and who, consequently, was only too happy in beingallowed to go and help nurse dear Miss Louisa.
Vague wishes ofgetting Sarah thither, had occurred before to Mrs Musgrove and Henrietta;but without Anne, it would hardly have been resolved on,and found practicable so soon.
They were indebted, the next day, to Charles Hayter, for allthe minute knowledge of Louisa, which it was so essential to obtainevery twenty-four hours.
He made it his business to go to Lyme,and his account was still encouraging.
The intervals of senseand consciousness were believed to be stronger.
Every report agreedin Captain Wentworth's appearing fixed in Lyme.
Anne was to leave them on the morrow, an event which they all dreaded.
"What should they do without her?
They were wretched comfortersfor one another."
And so much was said in this way, that Anne thoughtshe could not do better than impart among them the general inclinationto which she was privy, and persuaded them all to go to Lyme at once.
She had little difficulty; it was soon determined that they would go;go to-morrow, fix themselves at the inn, or get into lodgings,as it suited, and there remain till dear Louisa could be moved.
They must be taking off some trouble from the good people she was with;they might at least relieve Mrs Harville from the care of her own children;and in short, they were so happy in the decision, that Anne was delightedwith what she had done, and felt that she could not spend herlast morning at Uppercross better than in assisting their preparations,and sending them off at an early hour, though her being leftto the solitary range of the house was the consequence.
She was the last, excepting the little boys at the cottage,she was the very last, the only remaining one of all that had filledand animated both houses, of all that had given Uppercrossits cheerful character.
A few days had made a change indeed!
If Louisa recovered, it would all be well again.
More thanformer happiness would be restored.
There could not be a doubt,to her mind there was none, of what would follow her recovery.
A few months hence, and the room now so deserted, occupied but byher silent, pensive self, might be filled again with all that was happyand gay, all that was glowing and bright in prosperous love,all that was most unlike Anne Elliot!
An hour's complete leisure for such reflections as these,on a dark November day, a small thick rain almost blotting outthe very few objects ever to be discerned from the windows, was enoughto make the sound of Lady Russell's carriage exceedingly welcome;and yet, though desirous to be gone, she could not quit the Mansion House,or look an adieu to the Cottage, with its black, dripping andcomfortless veranda, or even notice through the misty glassesthe last humble tenements of the village, without a saddened heart.
Scenes had passed in Uppercross which made it precious.
It stood the record of many sensations of pain, once severe,but now softened; and of some instances of relenting feeling,some breathings of friendship and reconciliation, which couldnever be looked for again, and which could never cease to be dear.
She left it all behind her, all but the recollection thatsuch things had been.
Anne had never entered Kellynch since her quitting Lady Russell's housein September.
It had not been necessary, and the few occasions ofits being possible for her to go to the Hall she had contrived to evadeand escape from.
Her first return was to resume her place in the modernand elegant apartments of the Lodge, and to gladden the eyesof its mistress.
There was some anxiety mixed with Lady Russell's joy in meeting her.
She knew who had been frequenting Uppercross.
But happily,either Anne was improved in plumpness and looks, or Lady Russellfancied her so; and Anne, in receiving her compliments on the occasion,had the amusement of connecting them with the silent admirationof her cousin, and of hoping that she was to be blessed witha second spring of youth and beauty.
When they came to converse, she was soon sensible of some mental change.
The subjects of which her heart had been full on leaving Kellynch,and which she had felt slighted, and been compelled to smotheramong the Musgroves, were now become but of secondary interest.
She had lately lost sight even of her father and sister and Bath.
Their concerns had been sunk under those of Uppercross;and when Lady Russell reverted to their former hopes and fears,and spoke her satisfaction in the house in Camden Place,which had been taken, and her regret that Mrs Clay should stillbe with them, Anne would have been ashamed to have it knownhow much more she was thinking of Lyme and Louisa Musgrove,and all her acquaintance there; how much more interesting to herwas the home and the friendship of the Harvilles and Captain Benwick,than her own father's house in Camden Place, or her own sister's intimacywith Mrs Clay.
She was actually forced to exert herselfto meet Lady Russell with anything like the appearance of equal solicitude,on topics which had by nature the first claim on her.
There was a little awkwardness at first in their discourseon another subject.
They must speak of the accident at Lyme.
Lady Russell had not been arrived five minutes the day before,when a full account of the whole had burst on her; but still it mustbe talked of, she must make enquiries, she must regret the imprudence,lament the result, and Captain Wentworth's name must be mentioned by both.
Anne was conscious of not doing it so well as Lady Russell.
She could not speak the name, and look straight forward toLady Russell's eye, till she had adopted the expedient of telling herbriefly what she thought of the attachment between him and Louisa.
When this was told, his name distressed her no longer.
Lady Russell had only to listen composedly, and wish them happy,but internally her heart revelled in angry pleasure, in pleased contempt,that the man who at twenty-three had seemed to understand somewhatof the value of an Anne Elliot, should, eight years afterwards,be charmed by a Louisa Musgrove.
The first three or four days passed most quietly, with no circumstanceto mark them excepting the receipt of a note or two from Lyme,which found their way to Anne, she could not tell how, and broughta rather improving account of Louisa.
At the end of that period,Lady Russell's politeness could repose no longer, and the fainterself-threatenings of the past became in a decided tone,"I must call on Mrs Croft; I really must call upon her soon.
Anne, have you courage to go with me, and pay a visit in that house?
It will be some trial to us both."
Anne did not shrink from it; on the contrary, she truly felt as she said,in observing--"I think you are very likely to suffer the most of the two;your feelings are less reconciled to the change than mine.
By remaining in the neighbourhood, I am become inured to it."
She could have said more on the subject; for she had in factso high an opinion of the Crofts, and considered her fatherso very fortunate in his tenants, felt the parish to be so sureof a good example, and the poor of the best attention and relief,that however sorry and ashamed for the necessity of the removal,she could not but in conscience feel that they were gonewho deserved not to stay, and that Kellynch Hall had passedinto better hands than its owners'.
These convictions must unquestionablyhave their own pain, and severe was its kind; but they precludedthat pain which Lady Russell would suffer in entering the house again,and returning through the well-known apartments.
In such moments Anne had no power of saying to herself,"These rooms ought to belong only to us.
Oh, how fallenin their destination!
How unworthily occupied!
An ancient familyto be so driven away!
Strangers filling their place!"
No, except when she thought of her mother, and remembered whereshe had been used to sit and preside, she had no sigh of that descriptionto heave.
Mrs Croft always met her with a kindness which gave her the pleasureof fancying herself a favourite, and on the present occasion,receiving her in that house, there was particular attention.
The sad accident at Lyme was soon the prevailing topic,and on comparing their latest accounts of the invalid, it appearedthat each lady dated her intelligence from the same hour of yestermorn;that Captain Wentworth had been in Kellynch yesterday (the first timesince the accident), had brought Anne the last note, which she hadnot been able to trace the exact steps of; had staid a few hoursand then returned again to Lyme, and without any present intentionof quitting it any more.
He had enquired after her, she found,particularly; had expressed his hope of Miss Elliot's not beingthe worse for her exertions, and had spoken of those exertions as great.
This was handsome, and gave her more pleasure than almost anything elsecould have done.
As to the sad catastrophe itself, it could be canvassed only in one styleby a couple of steady, sensible women, whose judgements had to workon ascertained events; and it was perfectly decided that it had beenthe consequence of much thoughtlessness and much imprudence;that its effects were most alarming, and that it was frightful to think,how long Miss Musgrove's recovery might yet be doubtful, and how liableshe would still remain to suffer from the concussion hereafter!
The Admiral wound it up summarily by exclaiming--"Ay, a very bad business indeed.
A new sort of way this,for a young fellow to be making love, by breaking his mistress's head,is not it, Miss Elliot?
This is breaking a head and giving a plaster,truly!"
Admiral Croft's manners were not quite of the tone to suit Lady Russell,but they delighted Anne.
His goodness of heart and simplicityof character were irresistible.
"Now, this must be very bad for you," said he, suddenly rousing froma little reverie, "to be coming and finding us here.
I had notrecollected it before, I declare, but it must be very bad.
But now, do not stand upon ceremony.
Get up and go over all the roomsin the house if you like it."
"Another time, Sir, I thank you, not now."
"Well, whenever it suits you.
You can slip in from the shrubberyat any time; and there you will find we keep our umbrellas hanging upby that door.
A good place is not it?
But," (checking himself),"you will not think it a good place, for yours were always keptin the butler's room.
Ay, so it always is, I believe.
One man's ways may be as good as another's, but we all like our own best.
And so you must judge for yourself, whether it would be better for youto go about the house or not."
Anne, finding she might decline it, did so, very gratefully.
"We have made very few changes either," continued the Admiral,after thinking a moment.
"Very few.
We told you about the laundry-door,at Uppercross.
That has been a very great improvement.
The wonder was, how any family upon earth could bear with the inconvenienceof its opening as it did, so long!
You will tell Sir Walterwhat we have done, and that Mr Shepherd thinks it the greatest improvementthe house ever had.
Indeed, I must do ourselves the justice to say,that the few alterations we have made have been all very muchfor the better.
My wife should have the credit of them, however.
I have done very little besides sending away some of the largelooking-glasses from my dressing-room, which was your father's.
A very good man, and very much the gentleman I am sure:but I should think, Miss Elliot," (looking with serious reflection),"I should think he must be rather a dressy man for his time of life.
Such a number of looking-glasses!
oh Lord!
there was no getting awayfrom one's self.
So I got Sophy to lend me a hand, and we soonshifted their quarters; and now I am quite snug, with mylittle shaving glass in one corner, and another great thingthat I never go near."
Anne, amused in spite of herself, was rather distressed for an answer,and the Admiral, fearing he might not have been civil enough,took up the subject again, to say--"The next time you write to your good father, Miss Elliot,pray give him my compliments and Mrs Croft's, and say that we aresettled here quite to our liking, and have no fault at all to findwith the place.
The breakfast-room chimney smokes a little,I grant you, but it is only when the wind is due north and blows hard,which may not happen three times a winter.
And take it altogether,now that we have been into most of the houses hereabouts and can judge,there is not one that we like better than this.
Pray say so,with my compliments.
He will be glad to hear it."
Lady Russell and Mrs Croft were very well pleased with each other:but the acquaintance which this visit began was fated not to proceedfar at present; for when it was returned, the Crofts announcedthemselves to be going away for a few weeks, to visit their connexionsin the north of the county, and probably might not be at home againbefore Lady Russell would be removing to Bath.
So ended all danger to Anne of meeting Captain Wentworth at Kellynch Hall,or of seeing him in company with her friend.
Everything was safe enough,and she smiled over the many anxious feelings she had wastedon the subject.
Chapter 14Though Charles and Mary had remained at Lyme much longer afterMr and Mrs Musgrove's going than Anne conceived they could have beenat all wanted, they were yet the first of the family to be at home again;and as soon as possible after their return to Uppercrossthey drove over to the Lodge.
They had left Louisa beginning to sit up;but her head, though clear, was exceedingly weak, and her nervessusceptible to the highest extreme of tenderness; and thoughshe might be pronounced to be altogether doing very well,it was still impossible to say when she might be able to bearthe removal home; and her father and mother, who must returnin time to receive their younger children for the Christmas holidays,had hardly a hope of being allowed to bring her with them.
They had been all in lodgings together.
Mrs Musgrove hadgot Mrs Harville's children away as much as she could, every possiblesupply from Uppercross had been furnished, to lighten the inconvenienceto the Harvilles, while the Harvilles had been wanting themto come to dinner every day; and in short, it seemed to have beenonly a struggle on each side as to which should be most disinterestedand hospitable.
Mary had had her evils; but upon the whole, as was evidentby her staying so long, she had found more to enjoy than to suffer.
Charles Hayter had been at Lyme oftener than suited her; and whenthey dined with the Harvilles there had been only a maid-servant to wait,and at first Mrs Harville had always given Mrs Musgrove precedence;but then, she had received so very handsome an apology from heron finding out whose daughter she was, and there had been so muchgoing on every day, there had been so many walks between their lodgingsand the Harvilles, and she had got books from the library,and changed them so often, that the balance had certainly beenmuch in favour of Lyme.
She had been taken to Charmouth too,and she had bathed, and she had gone to church, and there were a great manymore people to look at in the church at Lyme than at Uppercross;and all this, joined to the sense of being so very useful,had made really an agreeable fortnight.
Anne enquired after Captain Benwick, Mary's face was clouded directly.
Charles laughed.
"Oh!
Captain Benwick is very well, I believe, but he isa very odd young man.
I do not know what he would be at.
We asked him to come home with us for a day or two:  Charles undertookto give him some shooting, and he seemed quite delighted, and, for my part,I thought it was all settled; when behold!
on Tuesday night,he made a very awkward sort of excuse; `he never shot' and he had`been quite misunderstood,' and he had promised this and he hadpromised that, and the end of it was, I found, that he did not mean to come.
I suppose he was afraid of finding it dull; but upon my wordI should have thought we were lively enough at the Cottagefor such a heart-broken man as Captain Benwick."
Charles laughed again and said, "Now Mary, you know very wellhow it really was.
It was all your doing," (turning to Anne.)
"He fancied that if he went with us, he should find you close by:he fancied everybody to be living in Uppercross; and when he discoveredthat Lady Russell lived three miles off, his heart failed him,and he had not courage to come.
That is the fact, upon my honour,Mary knows it is."
But Mary did not give into it very graciously, whether fromnot considering Captain Benwick entitled by birth and situationto be in love with an Elliot, or from not wanting to believeAnne a greater attraction to Uppercross than herself, must beleft to be guessed.
Anne's good-will, however, was not to be lessenedby what she heard.
She boldly acknowledged herself flattered,and continued her enquiries.
"Oh!
he talks of you," cried Charles, "in such terms--"Mary interrupted him.
"I declare, Charles, I never heard himmention Anne twice all the time I was there.
I declare, Anne,he never talks of you at all."
"No," admitted Charles, "I do not know that he ever does, in a generalway; but however, it is a very clear thing that he admires you exceedingly.
His head is full of some books that he is reading upon your recommendation,and he wants to talk to you about them; he has found out something or otherin one of them which he thinks--oh!
I cannot pretend to remember it,but it was something very fine--I overheard him telling Henriettaall about it; and then `Miss Elliot' was spoken of in the highest terms!
Now Mary, I declare it was so, I heard it myself, and you werein the other room.
`Elegance, sweetness, beauty.'
Oh!
there was no endof Miss Elliot's charms."
"And I am sure," cried Mary, warmly, "it was a very little to his credit,if he did.
Miss Harville only died last June.
Such a heartis very little worth having; is it, Lady Russell?
I am sureyou will agree with me."
"I must see Captain Benwick before I decide," said Lady Russell, smiling.
"And that you are very likely to do very soon, I can tell you, ma'am,"said Charles.
"Though he had not nerves for coming away with us,and setting off again afterwards to pay a formal visit here,he will make his way over to Kellynch one day by himself,you may depend on it.
I told him the distance and the road,and I told him of the church's being so very well worth seeing;for as he has a taste for those sort of things, I thought that wouldbe a good excuse, and he listened with all his understanding and soul;and I am sure from his manner that you will have him calling here soon.
So, I give you notice, Lady Russell."
"Any acquaintance of Anne's will always be welcome to me,"was Lady Russell's kind answer.
"Oh!
as to being Anne's acquaintance," said Mary, "I think he is rathermy acquaintance, for I have been seeing him every day this last fortnight."
"Well, as your joint acquaintance, then, I shall be very happyto see Captain Benwick."
"You will not find anything very agreeable in him, I assure you, ma'am.
He is one of the dullest young men that ever lived.
He has walked with me,sometimes, from one end of the sands to the other, without saying a word.
He is not at all a well-bred young man.
I am sure you will not like him."
"There we differ, Mary," said Anne.
"I think Lady Russell would like him.
I think she would be so much pleased with his mind, that she wouldvery soon see no deficiency in his manner."
"So do I, Anne," said Charles.
"I am sure Lady Russell would like him.
He is just Lady Russell's sort.
Give him a book, and he willread all day long."
"Yes, that he will!"
exclaimed Mary, tauntingly.
"He will sit poringover his book, and not know when a person speaks to him, or when onedrop's one's scissors, or anything that happens.
Do you thinkLady Russell would like that?"
Lady Russell could not help laughing.
"Upon my word," said she,"I should not have supposed that my opinion of any one could haveadmitted of such difference of conjecture, steady and matter of factas I may call myself.
I have really a curiosity to see the personwho can give occasion to such directly opposite notions.
I wish he may be induced to call here.
And when he does, Mary,you may depend upon hearing my opinion; but I am determinednot to judge him beforehand."
"You will not like him, I will answer for it."
Lady Russell began talking of something else.
Mary spoke with animationof their meeting with, or rather missing, Mr Elliot so extraordinarily.
"He is a man," said Lady Russell, "whom I have no wish to see.
His declining to be on cordial terms with the head of his family,has left a very strong impression in his disfavour with me."
This decision checked Mary's eagerness, and stopped her shortin the midst of the Elliot countenance.
With regard to Captain Wentworth, though Anne hazarded no enquiries,there was voluntary communication sufficient.
His spirits had beengreatly recovering lately as might be expected.
As Louisa improved,he had improved, and he was now quite a different creaturefrom what he had been the first week.
He had not seen Louisa;and was so extremely fearful of any ill consequence to herfrom an interview, that he did not press for it at all; and,on the contrary, seemed to have a plan of going away for a weekor ten days, till her head was stronger.
He had talked of goingdown to Plymouth for a week, and wanted to persuade Captain Benwickto go with him; but, as Charles maintained to the last, Captain Benwickseemed much more disposed to ride over to Kellynch.
There can be no doubt that Lady Russell and Anne were bothoccasionally thinking of Captain Benwick, from this time.
Lady Russell could not hear the door-bell without feeling that it mightbe his herald; nor could Anne return from any stroll of solitary indulgencein her father's grounds, or any visit of charity in the village,without wondering whether she might see him or hear of him.
Captain Benwick came not, however.
He was either less disposed for itthan Charles had imagined, or he was too shy; and after giving hima week's indulgence, Lady Russell determined him to be unworthyof the interest which he had been beginning to excite.
The Musgroves came back to receive their happy boys and girls from school,bringing with them Mrs Harville's little children, to improve the noiseof Uppercross, and lessen that of Lyme.
Henrietta remained with Louisa;but all the rest of the family were again in their usual quarters.
Lady Russell and Anne paid their compliments to them once,when Anne could not but feel that Uppercross was already quite alive again.
Though neither Henrietta, nor Louisa, nor Charles Hayter,nor Captain Wentworth were there, the room presented as strong a contrastas could be wished to the last state she had seen it in.
Immediately surrounding Mrs Musgrove were the little Harvilles,whom she was sedulously guarding from the tyranny of the two childrenfrom the Cottage, expressly arrived to amuse them.
On one sidewas a table occupied by some chattering girls, cutting up silkand gold paper; and on the other were tressels and trays,bending under the weight of brawn and cold pies, where riotous boyswere holding high revel; the whole completed by a roaring Christmas fire,which seemed determined to be heard, in spite of all the noiseof the others.
Charles and Mary also came in, of course,during their visit, and Mr Musgrove made a point of paying his respectsto Lady Russell, and sat down close to her for ten minutes,talking with a very raised voice, but from the clamour of the childrenon his knees, generally in vain.
It was a fine family-piece.
Anne, judging from her own temperament, would have deemedsuch a domestic hurricane a bad restorative of the nerves,which Louisa's illness must have so greatly shaken.
But Mrs Musgrove,who got Anne near her on purpose to thank her most cordially,again and again, for all her attentions to them, concludeda short recapitulation of what she had suffered herself by observing,with a happy glance round the room, that after all she had gone through,nothing was so likely to do her good as a little quiet cheerfulnessat home.
Louisa was now recovering apace.
Her mother could even think of herbeing able to join their party at home, before her brothers and sisterswent to school again.
The Harvilles had promised to come with herand stay at Uppercross, whenever she returned.
Captain Wentworth was gone,for the present, to see his brother in Shropshire.
"I hope I shall remember, in future," said Lady Russell, as soon asthey were reseated in the carriage, "not to call at Uppercrossin the Christmas holidays."
Everybody has their taste in noises as well as in other matters;and sounds are quite innoxious, or most distressing, by their sortrather than their quantity.
When Lady Russell not long afterwards,was entering Bath on a wet afternoon, and driving throughthe long course of streets from the Old Bridge to Camden Place,amidst the dash of other carriages, the heavy rumble of carts and drays,the bawling of newspapermen, muffin-men and milkmen, and the ceaselessclink of pattens, she made no complaint.
No, these were noiseswhich belonged to the winter pleasures; her spirits roseunder their influence; and like Mrs Musgrove, she was feeling,though not saying, that after being long in the country, nothing could beso good for her as a little quiet cheerfulness.
Anne did not share these feelings.
She persisted in a very determined,though very silent disinclination for Bath; caught the first dim viewof the extensive buildings, smoking in rain, without any wishof seeing them better; felt their progress through the streets to be,however disagreeable, yet too rapid; for who would be glad to see herwhen she arrived?
And looked back, with fond regret, to the bustlesof Uppercross and the seclusion of Kellynch.
Elizabeth's last letter had communicated a piece of news of some interest.
Mr Elliot was in Bath.
He had called in Camden Place; had calleda second time, a third; had been pointedly attentive.
If Elizabethand her father did not deceive themselves, had been taking much painsto seek the acquaintance, and proclaim the value of the connection,as he had formerly taken pains to shew neglect.
This was very wonderfulif it were true; and Lady Russell was in a state of very agreeablecuriosity and perplexity about Mr Elliot, already recanting the sentimentshe had so lately expressed to Mary, of his being "a man whom she hadno wish to see."
She had a great wish to see him.
If he really soughtto reconcile himself like a dutiful branch, he must be forgivenfor having dismembered himself from the paternal tree.
Anne was not animated to an equal pitch by the circumstance,but she felt that she would rather see Mr Elliot again than not,which was more than she could say for many other persons in Bath.
She was put down in Camden Place; and Lady Russell then droveto her own lodgings, in Rivers Street.
Chapter 15Sir Walter had taken a very good house in Camden Place,a lofty dignified situation, such as becomes a man of consequence;and both he and Elizabeth were settled there, much to their satisfaction.
Anne entered it with a sinking heart, anticipating an imprisonmentof many months, and anxiously saying to herself, "Oh!
when shall Ileave you again?"
A degree of unexpected cordiality, however,in the welcome she received, did her good.
Her father and sisterwere glad to see her, for the sake of shewing her the house and furniture,and met her with kindness.
Her making a fourth, when theysat down to dinner, was noticed as an advantage.
Mrs Clay was very pleasant, and very smiling, but her courtesies and smileswere more a matter of course.
Anne had always felt that she wouldpretend what was proper on her arrival, but the complaisance of the otherswas unlooked for.
They were evidently in excellent spirits,and she was soon to listen to the causes.
They had no inclinationto listen to her.
After laying out for some compliments of beingdeeply regretted in their old neighbourhood, which Anne could not pay,they had only a few faint enquiries to make, before the talk must beall their own.
Uppercross excited no interest, Kellynch very little:it was all Bath.
They had the pleasure of assuring her that Bath more than answeredtheir expectations in every respect.
Their house was undoubtedlythe best in Camden Place; their drawing-rooms had many decided advantagesover all the others which they had either seen or heard of,and the superiority was not less in the style of the fitting-up,or the taste of the furniture.
Their acquaintance wasexceedingly sought after.
Everybody was wanting to visit them.
They had drawn back from many introductions, and still wereperpetually having cards left by people of whom they knew nothing.
Here were funds of enjoyment.
Could Anne wonder that her fatherand sister were happy?
She might not wonder, but she must sighthat her father should feel no degradation in his change, should seenothing to regret in the duties and dignity of the resident landholder,should find so much to be vain of in the littlenesses of a town;and she must sigh, and smile, and wonder too, as Elizabeth threw openthe folding-doors and walked with exultation from one drawing-roomto the other, boasting of their space; at the possibility of that woman,who had been mistress of Kellynch Hall, finding extent to be proud ofbetween two walls, perhaps thirty feet asunder.
But this was not all which they had to make them happy.
They had Mr Elliot too.
Anne had a great deal to hear of Mr Elliot.
He was not only pardoned, they were delighted with him.
He had been in Bath about a fortnight; (he had passed through Bathin November, in his way to London, when the intelligence ofSir Walter's being settled there had of course reached him,though only twenty-four hours in the place, but he had not been ableto avail himself of it;) but he had now been a fortnight in Bath,and his first object on arriving, had been to leave his cardin Camden Place, following it up by such assiduous endeavours to meet,and when they did meet, by such great openness of conduct,such readiness to apologize for the past, such solicitude to be receivedas a relation again, that their former good understandingwas completely re-established.
They had not a fault to find in him.
He had explained awayall the appearance of neglect on his own side.
It had originatedin misapprehension entirely.
He had never had an idea ofthrowing himself off; he had feared that he was thrown off,but knew not why, and delicacy had kept him silent.
Upon the hintof having spoken disrespectfully or carelessly of the familyand the family honours, he was quite indignant.
He, who had ever boastedof being an Elliot, and whose feelings, as to connection,were only too strict to suit the unfeudal tone of the present day.
He was astonished, indeed, but his character and general conductmust refute it.
He could refer Sir Walter to all who knew him;and certainly, the pains he had been taking on this, the first opportunityof reconciliation, to be restored to the footing of a relationand heir-presumptive, was a strong proof of his opinions on the subject.
The circumstances of his marriage, too, were found to admit ofmuch extenuation.
This was an article not to be entered on by himself;but a very intimate friend of his, a Colonel Wallis, a highlyrespectable man, perfectly the gentleman, (and not an ill-looking man,Sir Walter added), who was living in very good style in MarlboroughBuildings, and had, at his own particular request, been admittedto their acquaintance through Mr Elliot, had mentioned one or two thingsrelative to the marriage, which made a material differencein the discredit of it.
Colonel Wallis had known Mr Elliot long, had been well acquaintedalso with his wife, had perfectly understood the whole story.
She was certainly not a woman of family, but well educated,accomplished, rich, and excessively in love with his friend.
There had been the charm.
She had sought him.
Without that attraction,not all her money would have tempted Elliot, and Sir Walter was,moreover, assured of her having been a very fine woman.
Here was a great deal to soften the business.
A very fine womanwith a large fortune, in love with him!
Sir Walter seemed to admit itas complete apology; and though Elizabeth could not see the circumstancein quite so favourable a light, she allowed it be a great extenuation.
Mr Elliot had called repeatedly, had dined with them once,evidently delighted by the distinction of being asked, for theygave no dinners in general; delighted, in short, by every proofof cousinly notice, and placing his whole happiness in beingon intimate terms in Camden Place.
Anne listened, but without quite understanding it.
Allowances,large allowances, she knew, must be made for the ideas of those who spoke.
She heard it all under embellishment.
All that sounded extravagantor irrational in the progress of the reconciliation might have no originbut in the language of the relators.
Still, however, she hadthe sensation of there being something more than immediately appeared,in Mr Elliot's wishing, after an interval of so many years,to be well received by them.
In a worldly view, he had nothing to gainby being on terms with Sir Walter; nothing to risk by a state of variance.
In all probability he was already the richer of the two,and the Kellynch estate would as surely be his hereafter as the title.
A sensible man, and he had looked like a very sensible man,why should it be an object to him?
She could only offer one solution;it was, perhaps, for Elizabeth's sake.
There might really have beena liking formerly, though convenience and accident had drawn hima different way; and now that he could afford to please himself,he might mean to pay his addresses to her.
Elizabeth was certainlyvery handsome, with well-bred, elegant manners, and her charactermight never have been penetrated by Mr Elliot, knowing her but in public,and when very young himself.
How her temper and understandingmight bear the investigation of his present keener time of lifewas another concern and rather a fearful one.
Most earnestly did she wishthat he might not be too nice, or too observant if Elizabethwere his object; and that Elizabeth was disposed to believe herself so,and that her friend Mrs Clay was encouraging the idea, seemed apparentby a glance or two between them, while Mr Elliot's frequent visitswere talked of.
Anne mentioned the glimpses she had had of him at Lyme, but withoutbeing much attended to.
"Oh!
yes, perhaps, it had been Mr Elliot.
They did not know.
It might be him, perhaps."
They could not listento her description of him.
They were describing him themselves;Sir Walter especially.
He did justice to his very gentlemanlikeappearance, his air of elegance and fashion, his good shaped face,his sensible eye; but, at the same time, "must lament his beingvery much under-hung, a defect which time seemed to have increased;nor could he pretend to say that ten years had not alteredalmost every feature for the worse.
Mr Elliot appeared to thinkthat he (Sir Walter) was looking exactly as he had done whenthey last parted;" but Sir Walter had "not been able to returnthe compliment entirely, which had embarrassed him.
He did not meanto complain, however.
Mr Elliot was better to look at than most men,and he had no objection to being seen with him anywhere."
Mr Elliot, and his friends in Marlborough Buildings, were talked ofthe whole evening.
"Colonel Wallis had been so impatient to beintroduced to them!
and Mr Elliot so anxious that he should!"
and there was a Mrs Wallis, at present known only to them by description,as she was in daily expectation of her confinement; but Mr Elliotspoke of her as "a most charming woman, quite worthy of being knownin Camden Place," and as soon as she recovered they were to be acquainted.
Sir Walter thought much of Mrs Wallis; she was said to bean excessively pretty woman, beautiful.
"He longed to see her.
He hoped she might make some amends for the many very plain faceshe was continually passing in the streets.
The worst of Bath wasthe number of its plain women.
He did not mean to say that there wereno pretty women, but the number of the plain was out of all proportion.
He had frequently observed, as he walked, that one handsome facewould be followed by thirty, or five-and-thirty frights; and once,as he had stood in a shop on Bond Street, he had countedeighty-seven women go by, one after another, without there beinga tolerable face among them.
It had been a frosty morning,to be sure, a sharp frost, which hardly one woman in a thousandcould stand the test of.
But still, there certainly werea dreadful multitude of ugly women in Bath; and as for the men!
they were infinitely worse.
Such scarecrows as the streets were full of!
It was evident how little the women were used to the sight of anythingtolerable, by the effect which a man of decent appearance produced.
He had never walked anywhere arm-in-arm with Colonel Wallis(who was a fine military figure, though sandy-haired) without observingthat every woman's eye was upon him; every woman's eye was sure to beupon Colonel Wallis."
Modest Sir Walter!
He was not allowedto escape, however.
His daughter and Mrs Clay united in hintingthat Colonel Wallis's companion might have as good a figureas Colonel Wallis, and certainly was not sandy-haired.
"How is Mary looking?"
said Sir Walter, in the height of his good humour.
"The last time I saw her she had a red nose, but I hope that may nothappen every day."
"Oh!
no, that must have been quite accidental.
In general she has beenin very good health and very good looks since Michaelmas."
"If I thought it would not tempt her to go out in sharp winds,and grow coarse, I would send her a new hat and pelisse."
Anne was considering whether she should venture to suggest that a gown,or a cap, would not be liable to any such misuse, when a knock at the doorsuspended everything.
"A knock at the door!
and so late!
It was ten o'clock.
Could it be Mr Elliot?
They knew he was to dinein Lansdown Crescent.
It was possible that he might stop in his way hometo ask them how they did.
They could think of no one else.
Mrs Clay decidedly thought it Mr Elliot's knock."
Mrs Clay was right.
With all the state which a butler and foot-boy could give,Mr Elliot was ushered into the room.
It was the same, the very same man, with no difference but of dress.
Anne drew a little back, while the others received his compliments,and her sister his apologies for calling at so unusual an hour,but "he could not be so near without wishing to know that neither shenor her friend had taken cold the day before," &c. &c; which wasall as politely done, and as politely taken, as possible, but her partmust follow then.
Sir Walter talked of his youngest daughter;"Mr Elliot must give him leave to present him to his youngest daughter"(there was no occasion for remembering Mary); and Anne, smiling andblushing, very becomingly shewed to Mr Elliot the pretty featureswhich he had by no means forgotten, and instantly saw, with amusementat his little start of surprise, that he had not been at all awareof who she was.
He looked completely astonished, but not more astonishedthan pleased; his eyes brightened!
and with the most perfect alacrityhe welcomed the relationship, alluded to the past, and entreatedto be received as an acquaintance already.
He was quite as good-lookingas he had appeared at Lyme, his countenance improved by speaking,and his manners were so exactly what they ought to be, so polished,so easy, so particularly agreeable, that she could compare themin excellence to only one person's manners.
They were not the same,but they were, perhaps, equally good.
He sat down with them, and improved their conversation very much.
There could be no doubt of his being a sensible man.
Ten minuteswere enough to certify that.
His tone, his expressions,his choice of subject, his knowing where to stop; it was allthe operation of a sensible, discerning mind.
As soon as he could,he began to talk to her of Lyme, wanting to compare opinionsrespecting the place, but especially wanting to speak of the circumstanceof their happening to be guests in the same inn at the same time;to give his own route, understand something of hers, and regret thathe should have lost such an opportunity of paying his respects to her.
She gave him a short account of her party and business at Lyme.
His regret increased as he listened.
He had spent his wholesolitary evening in the room adjoining theirs; had heard voices,mirth continually; thought they must be a most delightful set of people,longed to be with them, but certainly without the smallest suspicionof his possessing the shadow of a right to introduce himself.
If he had but asked who the party were!
The name of Musgrove wouldhave told him enough.
"Well, it would serve to cure him ofan absurd practice of never asking a question at an inn,which he had adopted, when quite a young man, on the principalof its being very ungenteel to be curious.
"The notions of a young man of one or two and twenty," said he,"as to what is necessary in manners to make him quite the thing,are more absurd, I believe, than those of any other set of beingsin the world.
The folly of the means they often employis only to be equalled by the folly of what they have in view."
But he must not be addressing his reflections to Anne alone:he knew it; he was soon diffused again among the others,and it was only at intervals that he could return to Lyme.
His enquiries, however, produced at length an account of the sceneshe had been engaged in there, soon after his leaving the place.
Having alluded to "an accident,"  he must hear the whole.
When he questioned, Sir Walter and Elizabeth began to question also,but the difference in their manner of doing it could not be unfelt.
She could only compare Mr Elliot to Lady Russell, in the wishof really comprehending what had passed, and in the degree of concernfor what she must have suffered in witnessing it.
He staid an hour with them.
The elegant little clock on the mantel-piece had struck "eleven with its silver sounds," and the watchmanwas beginning to be heard at a distance telling the same tale,before Mr Elliot or any of them seemed to feel that he had been there long.
Anne could not have supposed it possible that her first evening inCamden Place could have passed so well!
Chapter 16There was one point which Anne, on returning to her family,would have been more thankful to ascertain even than Mr Elliot'sbeing in love with Elizabeth, which was, her father's not beingin love with Mrs Clay; and she was very far from easy about it,when she had been at home a few hours.
On going down to breakfastthe next morning, she found there had just been a decent pretenceon the lady's side of meaning to leave them.
She could imagine Mrs Clayto have said, that "now Miss Anne was come, she could not suppose herselfat all wanted;" for Elizabeth was replying in a sort of whisper,"That must not be any reason, indeed.
I assure you I feel it none.
She is nothing to me, compared with you;"  and she was in full timeto hear her father say, "My dear madam, this must not be.
As yet,you have seen nothing of Bath.
You have been here only to be useful.
You must not run away from us now.
You must stay to be acquaintedwith Mrs Wallis, the beautiful Mrs Wallis.
To your fine mind,I well know the sight of beauty is a real gratification."
He spoke and looked so much in earnest, that Anne was not surprisedto see Mrs Clay stealing a glance at Elizabeth and herself.
Her countenance, perhaps, might express some watchfulness;but the praise of the fine mind did not appear to excite a thoughtin her sister.
The lady could not but yield to such joint entreaties,and promise to stay.
In the course of the same morning, Anne and her father chancing to bealone together, he began to compliment her on her improved looks;he thought her "less thin in her person, in her cheeks; her skin,her complexion, greatly improved; clearer, fresher.
Had she beenusing any thing in particular?"
"No, nothing."
"Merely Gowland,"he supposed.
"No, nothing at all."
"Ha!
he was surprised at that;"and added, "certainly you cannot do better than to continue as you are;you cannot be better than well; or I should recommend Gowland,the constant use of Gowland, during the spring months.
Mrs Clay has beenusing it at my recommendation, and you see what it has done for her.
You see how it has carried away her freckles."
If Elizabeth could but have heard this!
Such personal praisemight have struck her, especially as it did not appear to Annethat the freckles were at all lessened.
But everything musttake its chance.
The evil of a marriage would be much diminished,if Elizabeth were also to marry.
As for herself, she might alwayscommand a home with Lady Russell.
Lady Russell's composed mind and polite manners were put to some trialon this point, in her intercourse in Camden Place.
The sight of Mrs Clayin such favour, and of Anne so overlooked, was a perpetual provocationto her there; and vexed her as much when she was away, as a person in Bathwho drinks the water, gets all the new publications, and hasa very large acquaintance, has time to be vexed.
As Mr Elliot became known to her, she grew more charitable,or more indifferent, towards the others.
His manners werean immediate recommendation; and on conversing with him she foundthe solid so fully supporting the superficial, that she was at first,as she told Anne, almost ready to exclaim, "Can this be Mr Elliot?"
and could not seriously picture to herself a more agreeableor estimable man.
Everything united in him; good understanding,correct opinions, knowledge of the world, and a warm heart.
He had strong feelings of family attachment and family honour,without pride or weakness; he lived with the liberality of a man of fortune,without display; he judged for himself in everything essential,without defying public opinion in any point of worldly decorum.
He was steady, observant, moderate, candid; never run away with by spiritsor by selfishness, which fancied itself strong feeling; and yet,with a sensibility to what was amiable and lovely, and a valuefor all the felicities of domestic life, which characters offancied enthusiasm and violent agitation seldom really possess.
She was sure that he had not been happy in marriage.
Colonel Wallissaid it, and Lady Russell saw it; but it had been no unhappinessto sour his mind, nor (she began pretty soon to suspect) to prevent histhinking of a second choice.
Her satisfaction in Mr Elliotoutweighed all the plague of Mrs Clay.
It was now some years since Anne had begun to learn that sheand her excellent friend could sometimes think differently;and it did not surprise her, therefore, that Lady Russellshould see nothing suspicious or inconsistent, nothing to requiremore motives than appeared, in Mr Elliot's great desire of a reconciliation.
In Lady Russell's view, it was perfectly natural that Mr Elliot,at a mature time of life, should feel it a most desirable object,and what would very generally recommend him among all sensible people,to be on good terms with the head of his family; the simplest processin the world of time upon a head naturally clear, and only erringin the heyday of youth.
Anne presumed, however, still to smile about it,and at last to mention "Elizabeth."
Lady Russell listened, and looked,and made only this cautious reply:--"Elizabeth!
very well;time will explain."
It was a reference to the future, which Anne, after a little observation,felt she must submit to.
She could determine nothing at present.
In that house Elizabeth must be first; and she was in the habitof such general observance as "Miss Elliot," that any particularityof attention seemed almost impossible.
Mr Elliot, too,it must be remembered, had not been a widower seven months.
A little delay on his side might be very excusable.
In fact,Anne could never see the crape round his hat, without fearing thatshe was the inexcusable one, in attributing to him such imaginations;for though his marriage had not been very happy, still it had existedso many years that she could not comprehend a very rapid recoveryfrom the awful impression of its being dissolved.
However it might end, he was without any question theirpleasantest acquaintance in Bath:  she saw nobody equal to him;and it was a great indulgence now and then to talk to him about Lyme,which he seemed to have as lively a wish to see again, and to see more of,as herself.
They went through the particulars of their first meetinga great many times.
He gave her to understand that he hadlooked at her with some earnestness.
She knew it well;and she remembered another person's look also.
They did not always think alike.
His value for rank and connexionshe perceived was greater than hers.
It was not merely complaisance,it must be a liking to the cause, which made him enter warmlyinto her father and sister's solicitudes on a subject whichshe thought unworthy to excite them.
The Bath paper one morningannounced the arrival of the Dowager Viscountess Dalrymple,and her daughter, the Honourable Miss Carteret; and all the comfortof No.--, Camden Place, was swept away for many days; for the Dalrymples(in Anne's opinion, most unfortunately) were cousins of the Elliots;and the agony was how to introduce themselves properly.
Anne had never seen her father and sister before in contact with nobility,and she must acknowledge herself disappointed.
She had hopedbetter things from their high ideas of their own situation in life,and was reduced to form a wish which she had never foreseen;a wish that they had more pride; for "our cousins Lady Dalrympleand Miss Carteret;" "our cousins, the Dalrymples," sounded in her earsall day long.
Sir Walter had once been in company with the late viscount,but had never seen any of the rest of the family; and the difficultiesof the case arose from there having been a suspension of all intercourseby letters of ceremony, ever since the death of that said late viscount,when, in consequence of a dangerous illness of Sir Walter'sat the same time, there had been an unlucky omission at Kellynch.
No letter of condolence had been sent to Ireland.
The neglecthad been visited on the head of the sinner; for when poor Lady Elliotdied herself, no letter of condolence was received at Kellynch,and, consequently, there was but too much reason to apprehendthat the Dalrymples considered the relationship as closed.
How to have this anxious business set to rights, and be admittedas cousins again, was the question:  and it was a question which,in a more rational manner, neither Lady Russell nor Mr Elliotthought unimportant.
"Family connexions were always worth preserving,good company always worth seeking; Lady Dalrymple had taken a house,for three months, in Laura Place, and would be living in style.
She had been at Bath the year before, and Lady Russell had heard herspoken of as a charming woman.
It was very desirable thatthe connexion should be renewed, if it could be done, without anycompromise of propriety on the side of the Elliots."
Sir Walter, however, would choose his own means, and at last wrotea very fine letter of ample explanation, regret, and entreaty,to his right honourable cousin.
Neither Lady Russell nor Mr Elliotcould admire the letter; but it did all that was wanted,in bringing three lines of scrawl from the Dowager Viscountess.
"She was very much honoured, and should be happy in their acquaintance."
The toils of the business were over, the sweets began.
They visitedin Laura Place, they had the cards of Dowager Viscountess Dalrymple,and the Honourable Miss Carteret, to be arranged wherever they mightbe most visible:  and "Our cousins in Laura Place,"--"Our cousin,Lady Dalrymple and Miss Carteret," were talked of to everybody.
Anne was ashamed.
Had Lady Dalrymple and her daughter even beenvery agreeable, she would still have been ashamed of the agitationthey created, but they were nothing.
There was no superiority of manner,accomplishment, or understanding.
Lady Dalrymple had acquiredthe name of "a charming woman," because she had a smile and a civil answerfor everybody.
Miss Carteret, with still less to say, was so plainand so awkward, that she would never have been tolerated in Camden Placebut for her birth.
Lady Russell confessed she had expected something better; but yet"it was an acquaintance worth having;" and when Anne ventured to speakher opinion of them to Mr Elliot, he agreed to their being nothingin themselves, but still maintained that, as a family connexion,as good company, as those who would collect good company around them,they had their value.
Anne smiled and said,"My idea of good company, Mr Elliot, is the company of clever,well-informed people, who have a great deal of conversation;that is what I call good company."
"You are mistaken," said he gently, "that is not good company;that is the best.
Good company requires only birth, education,and manners, and with regard to education is not very nice.
Birth and good manners are essential; but a little learning isby no means a dangerous thing in good company; on the contrary,it will do very well.
My cousin Anne shakes her head.
She is not satisfied.
She is fastidious.
My dear cousin"(sitting down by her), "you have a better right to be fastidiousthan almost any other woman I know; but will it answer?
Will it make you happy?
Will it not be wiser to accept the societyof those good ladies in Laura Place, and enjoy all the advantagesof the connexion as far as possible?
You may depend upon it,that they will move in the first set in Bath this winter,and as rank is rank, your being known to be related to themwill have its use in fixing your family (our family let me say)in that degree of consideration which we must all wish for."
"Yes," sighed Anne, "we shall, indeed, be known to be related to them!"
then recollecting herself, and not wishing to be answered, she added,"I certainly do think there has been by far too much trouble takento procure the acquaintance.
I suppose" (smiling) "I have more pridethan any of you; but I confess it does vex me, that we should beso solicitous to have the relationship acknowledged, which we maybe very sure is a matter of perfect indifference to them."
"Pardon me, dear cousin, you are unjust in your own claims.
In London, perhaps, in your present quiet style of living,it might be as you say:  but in Bath; Sir Walter Elliot and his familywill always be worth knowing:  always acceptable as acquaintance."
"Well," said Anne, "I certainly am proud, too proud to enjoy a welcomewhich depends so entirely upon place."
"I love your indignation," said he; "it is very natural.
But here you are in Bath, and the object is to be established herewith all the credit and dignity which ought to belong to Sir Walter Elliot.
You talk of being proud; I am called proud, I know, and I shall not wishto believe myself otherwise; for our pride, if investigated,would have the same object, I have no doubt, though the kind may seema little different.
In one point, I am sure, my dear cousin,"(he continued, speaking lower, though there was no one else in the room)"in one point, I am sure, we must feel alike.
We must feel thatevery addition to your father's society, among his equals or superiors,may be of use in diverting his thoughts from those who are beneath him."
He looked, as he spoke, to the seat which Mrs Clay had beenlately occupying:  a sufficient explanation of what he particularly meant;and though Anne could not believe in their having the same sort of pride,she was pleased with him for not liking Mrs Clay; and her conscienceadmitted that his wishing to promote her father's gettinggreat acquaintance was more than excusable in the view of defeating her.
Chapter 17While Sir Walter and Elizabeth were assiduously pushing theirgood fortune in Laura Place, Anne was renewing an acquaintanceof a very different description.
She had called on her former governess, and had heard from herof there being an old school-fellow in Bath, who had the two strong claimson her attention of past kindness and present suffering.
Miss Hamilton,now Mrs Smith, had shewn her kindness in one of those periods of her lifewhen it had been most valuable.
Anne had gone unhappy to school,grieving for the loss of a mother whom she had dearly loved,feeling her separation from home, and suffering as a girl of fourteen,of strong sensibility and not high spirits, must suffer at such a time;and Miss Hamilton, three years older than herself, but still from the wantof near relations and a settled home, remaining another year at school,had been useful and good to her in a way which had considerably lessenedher misery, and could never be remembered with indifference.
Miss Hamilton had left school, had married not long afterwards,was said to have married a man of fortune, and this was allthat Anne had known of her, till now that their governess's accountbrought her situation forward in a more decided but very different form.
She was a widow and poor.
Her husband had been extravagant;and at his death, about two years before, had left his affairsdreadfully involved.
She had had difficulties of every sortto contend with, and in addition to these distresses had been afflictedwith a severe rheumatic fever, which, finally settling in her legs,had made her for the present a cripple.
She had come to Bathon that account, and was now in lodgings near the hot baths,living in a very humble way, unable even to afford herselfthe comfort of a servant, and of course almost excluded from society.
Their mutual friend answered for the satisfaction which a visitfrom Miss Elliot would give Mrs Smith, and Anne thereforelost no time in going.
She mentioned nothing of what she had heard,or what she intended, at home.
It would excite no proper interest there.
She only consulted Lady Russell, who entered thoroughly into her sentiments,and was most happy to convey her as near to Mrs Smith's lodgingsin Westgate Buildings, as Anne chose to be taken.
The visit was paid, their acquaintance re-established, their interestin each other more than re-kindled.
The first ten minuteshad its awkwardness and its emotion.
Twelve years were gonesince they had parted, and each presented a somewhat different personfrom what the other had imagined.
Twelve years had changed Annefrom the blooming, silent, unformed girl of fifteen, to the elegantlittle woman of seven-and-twenty, with every beauty except bloom,and with manners as consciously right as they were invariably gentle;and twelve years had transformed the fine-looking, well-grown Miss Hamilton,in all the glow of health and confidence of superiority, into a poor,infirm, helpless widow, receiving the visit of her former protegeeas a favour; but all that was uncomfortable in the meeting had soonpassed away, and left only the interesting charm of rememberingformer partialities and talking over old times.
Anne found in Mrs Smith the good sense and agreeable manners whichshe had almost ventured to depend on, and a disposition to converseand be cheerful beyond her expectation.
Neither the dissipationsof the past--and she had lived very much in the world--nor the restrictionsof the present, neither sickness nor sorrow seemed to haveclosed her heart or ruined her spirits.
In the course of a second visit she talked with great openness,and Anne's astonishment increased.
She could scarcely imaginea more cheerless situation in itself than Mrs Smith's.
She had beenvery fond of her husband:  she had buried him.
She had beenused to affluence:  it was gone.
She had no child to connect herwith life and happiness again, no relations to assist in the arrangementof perplexed affairs, no health to make all the rest supportable.
Her accommodations were limited to a noisy parlour, and a dark bedroombehind, with no possibility of moving from one to the other withoutassistance, which there was only one servant in the house to afford,and she never quitted the house but to be conveyed into the warm bath.
Yet, in spite of all this, Anne had reason to believe that she hadmoments only of languor and depression, to hours of occupationand enjoyment.
How could it be?
She watched, observed, reflected,and finally determined that this was not a case of fortitudeor of resignation only.
A submissive spirit might be patient,a strong understanding would supply resolution, but here was something more;here was that elasticity of mind, that disposition to be comforted,that power of turning readily from evil to good, and of finding employmentwhich carried her out of herself, which was from nature alone.
It was the choicest gift of Heaven; and Anne viewed her friendas one of those instances in which, by a merciful appointment,it seems designed to counterbalance almost every other want.
There had been a time, Mrs Smith told her, when her spiritshad nearly failed.
She could not call herself an invalid now,compared with her state on first reaching Bath.
Then she had, indeed,been a pitiable object; for she had caught cold on the journey,and had hardly taken possession of her lodgings before she was againconfined to her bed and suffering under severe and constant pain;and all this among strangers, with the absolute necessity of havinga regular nurse, and finances at that moment particularly unfitto meet any extraordinary expense.
She had weathered it, however,and could truly say that it had done her good.
It had increasedher comforts by making her feel herself to be in good hands.
She had seen too much of the world, to expect sudden or disinterestedattachment anywhere, but her illness had proved to her that her landladyhad a character to preserve, and would not use her ill; and she had beenparticularly fortunate in her nurse, as a sister of her landlady,a nurse by profession, and who had always a home in that housewhen unemployed, chanced to be at liberty just in time to attend her.
"And she," said Mrs Smith, "besides nursing me most admirably,has really proved an invaluable acquaintance.
As soon as I coulduse my hands she taught me to knit, which has been a great amusement;and she put me in the way of making these little thread-cases,pin-cushions and card-racks, which you always find me so busy about,and which supply me with the means of doing a little goodto one or two very poor families in this neighbourhood.
She had a large acquaintance, of course professionally, among thosewho can afford to buy, and she disposes of my merchandise.
She always takes the right time for applying.
Everybody's heart is open,you know, when they have recently escaped from severe pain,or are recovering the blessing of health, and Nurse Rookethoroughly understands when to speak.
She is a shrewd, intelligent,sensible woman.
Hers is a line for seeing human nature; and she hasa fund of good sense and observation, which, as a companion, make herinfinitely superior to thousands of those who having only received`the best education in the world,' know nothing worth attending to.
Call it gossip, if you will, but when Nurse Rooke has half an hour'sleisure to bestow on me, she is sure to have something to relatethat is entertaining and profitable:  something that makes oneknow one's species better.
One likes to hear what is going on,to be au fait as to the newest modes of being trifling and silly.
To me, who live so much alone, her conversation, I assure you, is a treat."
Anne, far from wishing to cavil at the pleasure, replied,"I can easily believe it.
Women of that class have great opportunities,and if they are intelligent may be well worth listening to.
Such varieties of human nature as they are in the habit of witnessing!
And it is not merely in its follies, that they are well read;for they see it occasionally under every circumstance that can bemost interesting or affecting.
What instances must pass before themof ardent, disinterested, self-denying attachment, of heroism, fortitude,patience, resignation:  of all the conflicts and all the sacrificesthat ennoble us most.
A sick chamber may often furnishthe worth of volumes."
"Yes," said Mrs Smith more doubtingly, "sometimes it may,though I fear its lessons are not often in the elevated style you describe.
Here and there, human nature may be great in times of trial;but generally speaking, it is its weakness and not its strengththat appears in a sick chamber:  it is selfishness and impatiencerather than generosity and fortitude, that one hears of.
There is so little real friendship in the world!
and unfortunately"(speaking low and tremulously) "there are so many who forgetto think seriously till it is almost too late."
Anne saw the misery of such feelings.
The husband had not beenwhat he ought, and the wife had been led among that part of mankindwhich made her think worse of the world than she hoped it deserved.
It was but a passing emotion however with Mrs Smith; she shook it off,and soon added in a different tone--"I do not suppose the situation my friend Mrs Rooke is in at present,will furnish much either to interest or edify me.
She is only nursingMrs Wallis of Marlborough Buildings; a mere pretty, silly, expensive,fashionable woman, I believe; and of course will have nothing to reportbut of lace and finery.
I mean to make my profit of Mrs Wallis, however.
She has plenty of money, and I intend she shall buy allthe high-priced things I have in hand now."
Anne had called several times on her friend, before the existenceof such a person was known in Camden Place.
At last, it became necessaryto speak of her.
Sir Walter, Elizabeth and Mrs Clay, returned one morningfrom Laura Place, with a sudden invitation from Lady Dalrymplefor the same evening, and Anne was already engaged, to spend that eveningin Westgate Buildings.
She was not sorry for the excuse.
They were only asked, she was sure, because Lady Dalrymple beingkept at home by a bad cold, was glad to make use of the relationshipwhich had been so pressed on her; and she declined on her own accountwith great alacrity--"She was engaged to spend the eveningwith an old schoolfellow."
They were not much interested in anythingrelative to Anne; but still there were questions enough asked,to make it understood what this old schoolfellow was; and Elizabethwas disdainful, and Sir Walter severe.
"Westgate Buildings!"
said he, "and who is Miss Anne Elliotto be visiting in Westgate Buildings?
A Mrs Smith.
A widow Mrs Smith;and who was her husband?
One of five thousand Mr Smiths whose namesare to be met with everywhere.
And what is her attraction?
That she is old and sickly.
Upon my word, Miss Anne Elliot,you have the most extraordinary taste!
Everything that revoltsother people, low company, paltry rooms, foul air, disgusting associationsare inviting to you.
But surely you may put off this old ladytill to-morrow:  she is not so near her end, I presume,but that she may hope to see another day.
What is her age?
Forty?"
"No, sir, she is not one-and-thirty; but I do not think I canput off my engagement, because it is the only evening for some timewhich will at once suit her and myself.
She goes into the warm bathto-morrow, and for the rest of the week, you know, we are engaged."
"But what does Lady Russell think of this acquaintance?"
asked Elizabeth.
"She sees nothing to blame in it," replied Anne; "on the contrary,she approves it, and has generally taken me when I havecalled on Mrs Smith.
"Westgate Buildings must have been rather surprised by the appearanceof a carriage drawn up near its pavement," observed Sir Walter.
"Sir Henry Russell's widow, indeed, has no honours to distinguish her arms,but still it is a handsome equipage, and no doubt is well knownto convey a Miss Elliot.
A widow Mrs Smith lodging in Westgate Buildings!
A poor widow barely able to live, between thirty and forty;a mere Mrs Smith, an every-day Mrs Smith, of all people and all namesin the world, to be the chosen friend of Miss Anne Elliot,and to be preferred by her to her own family connections among the nobilityof England and Ireland!
Mrs Smith!
Such a name!"
Mrs Clay, who had been present while all this passed, now thought itadvisable to leave the room, and Anne could have said much,and did long to say a little in defence of her friend'snot very dissimilar claims to theirs, but her sense of personal respectto her father prevented her.
She made no reply.
She left itto himself to recollect, that Mrs Smith was not the only widowin Bath between thirty and forty, with little to live on,and no surname of dignity.
Anne kept her appointment; the others kept theirs, and of courseshe heard the next morning that they had had a delightful evening.
She had been the only one of the set absent, for Sir Walterand Elizabeth had not only been quite at her ladyship's service themselves,but had actually been happy to be employed by her in collecting others,and had been at the trouble of inviting both Lady Russell and Mr Elliot;and Mr Elliot had made a point of leaving Colonel Wallis early,and Lady Russell had fresh arranged all her evening engagementsin order to wait on her.
Anne had the whole history of all thatsuch an evening could supply from Lady Russell.
To her,its greatest interest must be, in having been very much talked ofbetween her friend and Mr Elliot; in having been wished for, regretted,and at the same time honoured for staying away in such a cause.
Her kind, compassionate visits to this old schoolfellow,sick and reduced, seemed to have quite delighted Mr Elliot.
He thought her a most extraordinary young woman; in her temper, manners,mind, a model of female excellence.
He could meet even Lady Russellin a discussion of her merits; and Anne could not be given to understandso much by her friend, could not know herself to be so highly ratedby a sensible man, without many of those agreeable sensationswhich her friend meant to create.
Lady Russell was now perfectly decided in her opinion of Mr Elliot.
She was as much convinced of his meaning to gain Anne in time as ofhis deserving her, and was beginning to calculate the number of weekswhich would free him from all the remaining restraints of widowhood,and leave him at liberty to exert his most open powers of pleasing.
She would not speak to Anne with half the certainty she felt on the subject,she would venture on little more than hints of what might be hereafter,of a possible attachment on his side, of the desirableness of the alliance,supposing such attachment to be real and returned.
Anne heard her,and made no violent exclamations; she only smiled, blushed,and gently shook her head.
"I am no match-maker, as you well know," said Lady Russell,"being much too well aware of the uncertainty of all human eventsand calculations.
I only mean that if Mr Elliot should some time hencepay his addresses to you, and if you should be disposed to accept him,I think there would be every possibility of your being happy together.
A most suitable connection everybody must consider it, but I thinkit might be a very happy one."
"Mr Elliot is an exceedingly agreeable man, and in many respectsI think highly of him," said Anne; "but we should not suit."
Lady Russell let this pass, and only said in rejoinder, "I own thatto be able to regard you as the future mistress of Kellynch,the future Lady Elliot, to look forward and see you occupyingyour dear mother's place, succeeding to all her rights,and all her popularity, as well as to all her virtues, would bethe highest possible gratification to me.
You are your mother's selfin countenance and disposition; and if I might be allowed to fancy yousuch as she was, in situation and name, and home, presiding and blessingin the same spot, and only superior to her in being more highly valued!
My dearest Anne, it would give me more delight than is often feltat my time of life!"
Anne was obliged to turn away, to rise, to walk to a distant table,and, leaning there in pretended employment, try to subdue the feelingsthis picture excited.
For a few moments her imagination and her heartwere bewitched.
The idea of becoming what her mother had been;of having the precious name of "Lady Elliot" first revived in herself;of being restored to Kellynch, calling it her home again,her home for ever, was a charm which she could not immediately resist.
Lady Russell said not another word, willing to leave the matterto its own operation; and believing that, could Mr Elliot at that momentwith propriety have spoken for himself!--she believed, in short,what Anne did not believe.
The same image of Mr Elliot speakingfor himself brought Anne to composure again.
The charm of Kellynchand of "Lady Elliot" all faded away.
She never could accept him.
And it was not only that her feelings were still adverse to any mansave one; her judgement, on a serious consideration of the possibilitiesof such a case was against Mr Elliot.
Though they had now been acquainted a month, she could not be satisfiedthat she really knew his character.
That he was a sensible man,an agreeable man, that he talked well, professed good opinions,seemed to judge properly and as a man of principle, this was allclear enough.
He certainly knew what was right, nor could she fixon any one article of moral duty evidently transgressed; but yet she wouldhave been afraid to answer for his conduct.
She distrusted the past,if not the present.
The names which occasionally droptof former associates, the allusions to former practices and pursuits,suggested suspicions not favourable of what he had been.
She saw that there had been bad habits; that Sunday travellinghad been a common thing; that there had been a period of his life(and probably not a short one) when he had been, at least,careless in all serious matters; and, though he might now thinkvery differently, who could answer for the true sentiments of a clever,cautious man, grown old enough to appreciate a fair character?
How could it ever be ascertained that his mind was truly cleansed?
Mr Elliot was rational, discreet, polished, but he was not open.
There was never any burst of feeling, any warmth of indignation or delight,at the evil or good of others.
This, to Anne, was a decided imperfection.
Her early impressions were incurable.
She prized the frank,the open-hearted, the eager character beyond all others.
Warmth and enthusiasm did captivate her still.
She felt that she couldso much more depend upon the sincerity of those who sometimes lookedor said a careless or a hasty thing, than of those whose presence of mindnever varied, whose tongue never slipped.
Mr Elliot was too generally agreeable.
Various as were the tempersin her father's house, he pleased them all.
He endured too well,stood too well with every body.
He had spoken to her with somedegree of openness of Mrs Clay; had appeared completely to seewhat Mrs Clay was about, and to hold her in contempt; and yetMrs Clay found him as agreeable as any body.
Lady Russell saw either less or more than her young friend,for she saw nothing to excite distrust.
She could not imaginea man more exactly what he ought to be than Mr Elliot; nor did sheever enjoy a sweeter feeling than the hope of seeing him receivethe hand of her beloved Anne in Kellynch church, in the course ofthe following autumn.
Chapter 18It was the beginning of February; and Anne, having been a month in Bath,was growing very eager for news from Uppercross and Lyme.
She wanted to hear much more than Mary had communicated.
It was three weeks since she had heard at all.
She only knewthat Henrietta was at home again; and that Louisa, though considered to berecovering fast, was still in Lyme; and she was thinking of them allvery intently one evening, when a thicker letter than usual from Marywas delivered to her; and, to quicken the pleasure and surprise,with Admiral and Mrs Croft's compliments.
The Crofts must be in Bath!
A circumstance to interest her.
They were people whom her heart turned to very naturally.
"What is this?"
cried Sir Walter.
"The Crofts have arrived in Bath?
The Crofts who rent Kellynch?
What have they brought you?"
"A letter from Uppercross Cottage, Sir."
"Oh!
those letters are convenient passports.
They secure an introduction.
I should have visited Admiral Croft, however, at any rate.
I know what is due to my tenant."
Anne could listen no longer; she could not even have told howthe poor Admiral's complexion escaped; her letter engrossed her.
It had been begun several days back.
"February 1st.
"My dear Anne,--I make no apology for my silence, because I knowhow little people think of letters in such a place as Bath.
You must be a great deal too happy to care for Uppercross, which,as you well know, affords little to write about.
We have hada very dull Christmas; Mr and Mrs Musgrove have not had one dinner partyall the holidays.
I do not reckon the Hayters as anybody.
The holidays, however, are over at last:  I believe no children ever hadsuch long ones.
I am sure I had not.
The house was cleared yesterday,except of the little Harvilles; but you will be surprised to hearthey have never gone home.
Mrs Harville must be an odd motherto part with them so long.
I do not understand it.
They arenot at all nice children, in my opinion; but Mrs Musgrove seems tolike them quite as well, if not better, than her grandchildren.
What dreadful weather we have had!
It may not be felt in Bath,with your nice pavements; but in the country it is of some consequence.
I have not had a creature call on me since the second week in January,except Charles Hayter, who had been calling much oftener than was welcome.
Between ourselves, I think it a great pity Henrietta did not remain at Lymeas long as Louisa; it would have kept her a little out of his way.
The carriage is gone to-day, to bring Louisa and the Harvilles to-morrow.
We are not asked to dine with them, however, till the day after,Mrs Musgrove is so afraid of her being fatigued by the journey,which is not very likely, considering the care that will be taken of her;and it would be much more convenient to me to dine there to-morrow.
I am glad you find Mr Elliot so agreeable, and wish I could be acquaintedwith him too; but I have my usual luck:  I am always out of the waywhen any thing desirable is going on; always the last of my familyto be noticed.
What an immense time Mrs Clay has been stayingwith Elizabeth!
Does she never mean to go away?
But perhapsif she were to leave the room vacant, we might not be invited.
Let me know what you think of this.
I do not expect my childrento be asked, you know.
I can leave them at the Great House very well,for a month or six weeks.
I have this moment heard that the Croftsare going to Bath almost immediately; they think the Admiral gouty.
Charles heard it quite by chance; they have not had the civilityto give me any notice, or of offering to take anything.
I do not think they improve at all as neighbours.
We see nothing of them,and this is really an instance of gross inattention.
Charles joins mein love, and everything proper.
Yours affectionately,  "Mary M---.
"I am sorry to say that I am very far from well; and Jemima hasjust told me that the butcher says there is a bad sore-throatvery much about.
I dare say I shall catch it; and my sore-throats,you know, are always worse than anybody's."
So ended the first part, which had been afterwards put into an envelope,containing nearly as much more.
"I kept my letter open, that I might send you word how Louisabore her journey, and now I am extremely glad I did, having a great dealto add.
In the first place, I had a note from Mrs Croft yesterday,offering to convey anything to you; a very kind, friendly note indeed,addressed to me, just as it ought; I shall therefore be able tomake my letter as long as I like.
The Admiral does not seem very ill,and I sincerely hope Bath will do him all the good he wants.
I shall be truly glad to have them back again.
Our neighbourhoodcannot spare such a pleasant family.
But now for Louisa.
I have something to communicate that will astonish you not a little.
She and the Harvilles came on Tuesday very safely, and in the eveningwe went to ask her how she did, when we were rather surprisednot to find Captain Benwick of the party, for he had been invitedas well as the Harvilles; and what do you think was the reason?
Neither more nor less than his being in love with Louisa,and not choosing to venture to Uppercross till he had had an answerfrom Mr Musgrove; for it was all settled between him and herbefore she came away, and he had written to her father by Captain Harville.
True, upon my honour!
Are not you astonished?
I shall be surprisedat least if you ever received a hint of it, for I never did.
Mrs Musgrove protests solemnly that she knew nothing of the matter.
We are all very well pleased, however, for though it is not equal to hermarrying Captain Wentworth, it is infinitely better than Charles Hayter;and Mr Musgrove has written his consent, and Captain Benwickis expected to-day.
Mrs Harville says her husband feels a good dealon his poor sister's account; but, however, Louisa is a great favouritewith both.
Indeed, Mrs Harville and I quite agree that we love herthe better for having nursed her.
Charles wonders what Captain Wentworthwill say; but if you remember, I never thought him attached to Louisa;I never could see anything of it.
And this is the end, you see,of Captain Benwick's being supposed to be an admirer of yours.
How Charles could take such a thing into his head was alwaysincomprehensible to me.
I hope he will be more agreeable now.
Certainly not a great match for Louisa Musgrove, but a million times betterthan marrying among the Hayters."
Mary need not have feared her sister's being in any degree preparedfor the news.
She had never in her life been more astonished.
Captain Benwick and Louisa Musgrove!
It was almost too wonderfulfor belief, and it was with the greatest effort that she could remainin the room, preserve an air of calmness, and answer the common questionsof the moment.
Happily for her, they were not many.
Sir Walterwanted to know whether the Crofts travelled with four horses,and whether they were likely to be situated in such a part of Bathas it might suit Miss Elliot and himself to visit in; but hadlittle curiosity beyond.
"How is Mary?"
said Elizabeth; and without waiting for an answer,"And pray what brings the Crofts to Bath?"
"They come on the Admiral's account.
He is thought to be gouty."
"Gout and decrepitude!"
said Sir Walter.
"Poor old gentleman."
"Have they any acquaintance here?"
asked Elizabeth.
"I do not know; but I can hardly suppose that, at Admiral Croft'stime of life, and in his profession, he should not have many acquaintancein such a place as this."
"I suspect," said Sir Walter coolly, "that Admiral Croftwill be best known in Bath as the renter of Kellynch Hall.
Elizabeth, may we venture to present him and his wife in Laura Place?"
"Oh, no!
I think not.
Situated as we are with Lady Dalrymple, cousins,we ought to be very careful not to embarrass her with acquaintanceshe might not approve.
If we were not related, it would not signify;but as cousins, she would feel scrupulous as to any proposal of ours.
We had better leave the Crofts to find their own level.
There are several odd-looking men walking about here, who,I am told, are sailors.
The Crofts will associate with them."
This was Sir Walter and Elizabeth's share of interest in the letter;when Mrs Clay had paid her tribute of more decent attention,in an enquiry after Mrs Charles Musgrove, and her fine little boys,Anne was at liberty.
In her own room, she tried to comprehend it.
Well might Charles wonderhow Captain Wentworth would feel!
Perhaps he had quitted the field,had given Louisa up, had ceased to love, had found he did not love her.
She could not endure the idea of treachery or levity, or anythingakin to ill usage between him and his friend.
She could not endurethat such a friendship as theirs should be severed unfairly.
Captain Benwick and Louisa Musgrove!
The high-spirited,joyous-talking Louisa Musgrove, and the dejected, thinking,feeling, reading, Captain Benwick, seemed each of them everythingthat would not suit the other.
Their minds most dissimilar!
Where could have been the attraction?
The answer soon presented itself.
It had been in situation.
They had been thrown together several weeks;they had been living in the same small family party:  since Henrietta'scoming away, they must have been depending almost entirely on each other,and Louisa, just recovering from illness, had been in an interesting state,and Captain Benwick was not inconsolable.
That was a point which Annehad not been able to avoid suspecting before; and instead of drawingthe same conclusion as Mary, from the present course of events,they served only to confirm the idea of his having felt somedawning of tenderness toward herself.
She did not mean, however,to derive much more from it to gratify her vanity, than Marymight have allowed.
She was persuaded that any tolerably pleasingyoung woman who had listened and seemed to feel for him would havereceived the same compliment.
He had an affectionate heart.
He must love somebody.
She saw no reason against their being happy.
Louisa had finenaval fervour to begin with, and they would soon grow more alike.
He would gain cheerfulness, and she would learn to be an enthusiastfor Scott and Lord Byron; nay, that was probably learnt already;of course they had fallen in love over poetry.
The idea ofLouisa Musgrove turned into a person of literary taste,and sentimental reflection was amusing, but she had no doubtof its being so.
The day at Lyme, the fall from the Cobb,might influence her health, her nerves, her courage, her character tothe end of her life, as thoroughly as it appeared to haveinfluenced her fate.
The conclusion of the whole was, that if the woman who had been sensibleof Captain Wentworth's merits could be allowed to prefer another man,there was nothing in the engagement to excite lasting wonder;and if Captain Wentworth lost no friend by it, certainly nothingto be regretted.
No, it was not regret which made Anne's heartbeat in spite of herself, and brought the colour into her cheekswhen she thought of Captain Wentworth unshackled and free.
She had some feelings which she was ashamed to investigate.
They were too much like joy, senseless joy!
She longed to see the Crofts; but when the meeting took place,it was evident that no rumour of the news had yet reached them.
The visit of ceremony was paid and returned; and Louisa Musgrovewas mentioned, and Captain Benwick, too, without even half a smile.
The Crofts had placed themselves in lodgings in Gay Street,perfectly to Sir Walter's satisfaction.
He was not at all ashamedof the acquaintance, and did, in fact, think and talk a great deal moreabout the Admiral, than the Admiral ever thought or talked about him.
The Crofts knew quite as many people in Bath as they wished for,and considered their intercourse with the Elliots as a mere matter of form,and not in the least likely to afford them any pleasure.
They brought with them their country habit of being almost always together.
He was ordered to walk to keep off the gout, and Mrs Croftseemed to go shares with him in everything, and to walkfor her life to do him good.
Anne saw them wherever she went.
Lady Russell took her out in her carriage almost every morning,and she never failed to think of them, and never failed to see them.
Knowing their feelings as she did, it was a most attractive pictureof happiness to her.
She always watched them as long as she could,delighted to fancy she understood what they might be talking of,as they walked along in happy independence, or equally delightedto see the Admiral's hearty shake of the hand when he encounteredan old friend, and observe their eagerness of conversationwhen occasionally forming into a little knot of the navy, Mrs Croftlooking as intelligent and keen as any of the officers around her.
Anne was too much engaged with Lady Russell to be often walking herself;but it so happened that one morning, about a week or ten daysafter the Croft's arrival, it suited her best to leave her friend,or her friend's carriage, in the lower part of the town,and return alone to Camden Place, and in walking up Milsom Streetshe had the good fortune to meet with the Admiral.
He was standingby himself at a printshop window, with his hands behind him,in earnest contemplation of some print, and she not only might havepassed him unseen, but was obliged to touch as well as address himbefore she could catch his notice.
When he did perceive andacknowledge her, however, it was done with all his usual franknessand good humour.
"Ha!
is it you?
Thank you, thank you.
This is treating me like a friend.
Here I am, you see,staring at a picture.
I can never get by this shop without stopping.
But what a thing here is, by way of a boat!
Do look at it.
Did you ever see the like?
What queer fellows your fine painters must be,to think that anybody would venture their lives in such a shapelessold cockleshell as that?
And yet here are two gentlemenstuck up in it mightily at their ease, and looking about them at the rocksand mountains, as if they were not to be upset the next moment,which they certainly must be.
I wonder where that boat was built!"
(laughing heartily); "I would not venture over a horsepond in it.
Well," (turning away), "now, where are you bound?
Can I go anywherefor you, or with you?
Can I be of any use?"
"None, I thank you, unless you will give me the pleasure of your companythe little way our road lies together.
I am going home."
"That I will, with all my heart, and farther, too.
Yes, yeswe will have a snug walk together, and I have something to tell youas we go along.
There, take my arm; that's right; I do notfeel comfortable if I have not a woman there.
Lord!
what a boat it is!"
taking a last look at the picture, as they began to be in motion.
"Did you say that you had something to tell me, sir?"
"Yes, I have, presently.
But here comes a friend, Captain Brigden;I shall only say, `How d'ye do?'
as we pass, however.
I shall not stop.
`How d'ye do?'
Brigden stares to see anybody with me but my wife.
She, poor soul, is tied by the leg.
She has a blister on one of her heels,as large as a three-shilling piece.
If you look across the street,you will see Admiral Brand coming down and his brother.
Shabby fellows,both of them!
I am glad they are not on this side of the way.
Sophy cannot bear them.
They played me a pitiful trick once:got away with some of my best men.
I will tell you the whole storyanother time.
There comes old Sir Archibald Drew and his grandson.
Look, he sees us; he kisses his hand to you; he takes you for my wife.
Ah!
the peace has come too soon for that younker.
Poor old Sir Archibald!
How do you like Bath, Miss Elliot?
It suits us very well.
We are always meeting with some old friend or other; the streetsfull of them every morning; sure to have plenty of chat;and then we get away from them all, and shut ourselves in our lodgings,and draw in our chairs, and are snug as if we were at Kellynch,ay, or as we used to be even at North Yarmouth and Deal.
We do not like our lodgings here the worse, I can tell you,for putting us in mind of those we first had at North Yarmouth.
The wind blows through one of the cupboards just in the same way."
When they were got a little farther, Anne ventured to press againfor what he had to communicate.
She hoped when clear of Milsom Streetto have her curiosity gratified; but she was still obliged to wait,for the Admiral had made up his mind not to begin till they hadgained the greater space and quiet of Belmont; and as she wasnot really Mrs Croft, she must let him have his own way.
As soon as they were fairly ascending Belmont, he began--"Well, now you shall hear something that will surprise you.
But first of all, you must tell me the name of the young ladyI am going to talk about.
That young lady, you know, that we haveall been so concerned for.
The Miss Musgrove, that all this has beenhappening to.
Her Christian name:  I always forget her Christian name."
Anne had been ashamed to appear to comprehend so soon as she reallydid; but now she could safely suggest the name of "Louisa."
"Ay, ay, Miss Louisa Musgrove, that is the name.
I wish young ladieshad not such a number of fine Christian names.
I should never be outif they were all Sophys, or something of that sort.
Well,this Miss Louisa, we all thought, you know, was to marry Frederick.
He was courting her week after week.
The only wonder was,what they could be waiting for, till the business at Lyme came;then, indeed, it was clear enough that they must wait till her brainwas set to right.
But even then there was something odd in theirway of going on.
Instead of staying at Lyme, he went off to Plymouth,and then he went off to see Edward.
When we came back from Mineheadhe was gone down to Edward's, and there he has been ever since.
We have seen nothing of him since November.
Even Sophy couldnot understand it.
But now, the matter has take the strangest turn of all;for this young lady, the same Miss Musgrove, instead of beingto marry Frederick, is to marry James Benwick.
You know James Benwick."
"A little.
I am a little acquainted with Captain Benwick."
"Well, she is to marry him.
Nay, most likely they are married already,for I do not know what they should wait for."
"I thought Captain Benwick a very pleasing young man," said Anne,"and I understand that he bears an excellent character."
"Oh!
yes, yes, there is not a word to be said against James Benwick.
He is only a commander, it is true, made last summer, and these arebad times for getting on, but he has not another fault that I know of.
An excellent, good-hearted fellow, I assure you; a very active,zealous officer too, which is more than you would think for, perhaps,for that soft sort of manner does not do him justice."
"Indeed you are mistaken there, sir; I should never augur want of spiritfrom Captain Benwick's manners.
I thought them particularly pleasing,and I will answer for it, they would generally please."
"Well, well, ladies are the best judges; but James Benwick is rather toopiano for me; and though very likely it is all our partiality,Sophy and I cannot help thinking Frederick's manners better than his.
There is something about Frederick more to our taste."
Anne was caught.
She had only meant to oppose the too common ideaof spirit and gentleness being incompatible with each other,not at all to represent Captain Benwick's manners as the very bestthat could possibly be; and, after a little hesitation,she was beginning to say, "I was not entering into any comparisonof the two friends," but the Admiral interrupted her with--"And the thing is certainly true.
It is not a mere bit of gossip.
We have it from Frederick himself.
His sister had a letterfrom him yesterday, in which he tells us of it, and he had just had itin a letter from Harville, written upon the spot, from Uppercross.
I fancy they are all at Uppercross."
This was an opportunity which Anne could not resist; she said, therefore,"I hope, Admiral, I hope there is nothing in the style of CaptainWentworth's letter to make you and Mrs Croft particularly uneasy.
It did seem, last autumn, as if there were an attachment between himand Louisa Musgrove; but I hope it may be understood to have worn outon each side equally, and without violence.
I hope his letterdoes not breathe the spirit of an ill-used man."
"Not at all, not at all; there is not an oath or a murmurfrom beginning to end."
Anne looked down to hide her smile.
"No, no; Frederick is not a man to whine and complain; he hastoo much spirit for that.
If the girl likes another man better,it is very fit she should have him."
"Certainly.
But what I mean is, that I hope there is nothingin Captain Wentworth's manner of writing to make you supposehe thinks himself ill-used by his friend, which might appear,you know, without its being absolutely said.
I should be very sorrythat such a friendship as has subsisted between him and Captain Benwickshould be destroyed, or even wounded, by a circumstance of this sort."
"Yes, yes, I understand you.
But there is nothing at all of that naturein the letter.
He does not give the least fling at Benwick;does not so much as say, `I wonder at it, I have a reason of my ownfor wondering at it.'
No, you would not guess, from his way of writing,that he had ever thought of this Miss (what's her name?)
for himself.
He very handsomely hopes they will be happy together; and there isnothing very unforgiving in that, I think."
Anne did not receive the perfect conviction which the Admiral meantto convey, but it would have been useless to press the enquiry farther.
She therefore satisfied herself with common-place remarks or quietattention, and the Admiral had it all his own way.
"Poor Frederick!"
said he at last.
"Now he must begin all over againwith somebody else.
I think we must get him to Bath.
Sophy must write,and beg him to come to Bath.
Here are pretty girls enough, I am sure.
It would be of no use to go to Uppercross again, for that otherMiss Musgrove, I find, is bespoke by her cousin, the young parson.
Do not you think, Miss Elliot, we had better try to get him to Bath?"
Chapter 19While Admiral Croft was taking this walk with Anne, and expressinghis wish of getting Captain Wentworth to Bath, Captain Wentworthwas already on his way thither.
Before Mrs Croft had written,he was arrived, and the very next time Anne walked out, she saw him.
Mr Elliot was attending his two cousins and Mrs Clay.
They werein Milsom Street.
It began to rain, not much, but enough tomake shelter desirable for women, and quite enough to make itvery desirable for Miss Elliot to have the advantage of beingconveyed home in Lady Dalrymple's carriage, which was seen waitingat a little distance; she, Anne, and Mrs Clay, therefore,turned into Molland's, while Mr Elliot stepped to Lady Dalrymple,to request her assistance.
He soon joined them again, successful,of course; Lady Dalrymple would be most happy to take them home,and would call for them in a few minutes.
Her ladyship's carriage was a barouche, and did not holdmore than four with any comfort.
Miss Carteret was with her mother;consequently it was not reasonable to expect accommodationfor all the three Camden Place ladies.
There could be no doubtas to Miss Elliot.
Whoever suffered inconvenience, she must suffer none,but it occupied a little time to settle the point of civilitybetween the other two.
The rain was a mere trifle, and Anne wasmost sincere in preferring a walk with Mr Elliot.
But the rain was alsoa mere trifle to Mrs Clay; she would hardly allow it even to drop at all,and her boots were so thick!
much thicker than Miss Anne's;and, in short, her civility rendered her quite as anxious to be leftto walk with Mr Elliot as Anne could be, and it was discussed between themwith a generosity so polite and so determined, that the others wereobliged to settle it for them; Miss Elliot maintaining that Mrs Clayhad a little cold already, and Mr Elliot deciding on appeal,that his cousin Anne's boots were rather the thickest.
It was fixed accordingly, that Mrs Clay should be of the partyin the carriage; and they had just reached this point, when Anne,as she sat near the window, descried, most decidedly and distinctly,Captain Wentworth walking down the street.
Her start was perceptible only to herself; but she instantly felt thatshe was the greatest simpleton in the world, the most unaccountableand absurd!
For a few minutes she saw nothing before her;it was all confusion.
She was lost, and when she had scoldedback her senses, she found the others still waiting for the carriage,and Mr Elliot (always obliging) just setting off for Union Streeton a commission of Mrs Clay's.
She now felt a great inclination to go to the outer door;she wanted to see if it rained.
Why was she to suspect herselfof another motive?
Captain Wentworth must be out of sight.
She left her seat, she would go; one half of her should not be alwaysso much wiser than the other half, or always suspecting the otherof being worse than it was.
She would see if it rained.
She was sent back, however, in a moment by the entrance ofCaptain Wentworth himself, among a party of gentlemen and ladies,evidently his acquaintance, and whom he must have joineda little below Milsom Street.
He was more obviously struckand confused by the sight of her than she had ever observed before;he looked quite red.
For the first time, since their renewed acquaintance,she felt that she was betraying the least sensibility of the two.
She had the advantage of him in the preparation of the last few moments.
All the overpowering, blinding, bewildering, first effectsof strong surprise were over with her.
Still, however,she had enough to feel!
It was agitation, pain, pleasure,a something between delight and misery.
He spoke to her, and then turned away.
The character of his mannerwas embarrassment.
She could not have called it either cold or friendly,or anything so certainly as embarrassed.
After a short interval, however, he came towards her, and spoke again.
Mutual enquiries on common subjects passed:  neither of them, probably,much the wiser for what they heard, and Anne continuing fully sensibleof his being less at ease than formerly.
They had by dint of beingso very much together, got to speak to each other with a considerableportion of apparent indifference and calmness; but he could not do it now.
Time had changed him, or Louisa had changed him.
There was consciousnessof some sort or other.
He looked very well, not as if he had beensuffering in health or spirits, and he talked of Uppercross,of the Musgroves, nay, even of Louisa, and had even a momentary lookof his own arch significance as he named her; but yet it wasCaptain Wentworth not comfortable, not easy, not able to feign that he was.
It did not surprise, but it grieved Anne to observe that Elizabethwould not know him.
She saw that he saw Elizabeth, that Elizabeth saw him,that there was complete internal recognition on each side;she was convinced that he was ready to be acknowledged as an acquaintance,expecting it, and she had the pain of seeing her sister turn awaywith unalterable coldness.
Lady Dalrymple's carriage, for which Miss Elliot was growingvery impatient, now drew up; the servant came in to announce it.
It was beginning to rain again, and altogether there was a delay,and a bustle, and a talking, which must make all the little crowdin the shop understand that Lady Dalrymple was calling to conveyMiss Elliot.
At last Miss Elliot and her friend, unattended butby the servant, (for there was no cousin returned), were walking off;and Captain Wentworth, watching them, turned again to Anne,and by manner, rather than words, was offering his services to her.
"I am much obliged to you," was her answer, "but I am not going with them.
The carriage would not accommodate so many.
I walk:  I prefer walking."
"But it rains."
"Oh!
very little,  Nothing that I regard."
After a moment's pause he said:  "Though I came only yesterday,I have equipped myself properly for Bath already, you see,"(pointing to a new umbrella); "I wish you would make use of it,if you are determined to walk; though I think it would be more prudentto let me get you a chair."
She was very much obliged to him, but declined it all, repeatingher conviction, that the rain would come to nothing at present,and adding, "I am only waiting for Mr Elliot.
He will be here in a moment,I am sure."
She had hardly spoken the words when Mr Elliot walked in.
Captain Wentworth recollected him perfectly.
There was no differencebetween him and the man who had stood on the steps at Lyme,admiring Anne as she passed, except in the air and look and mannerof the privileged relation and friend.
He came in with eagerness,appeared to see and think only of her, apologised for his stay,was grieved to have kept her waiting, and anxious to get her awaywithout further loss of time and before the rain increased;and in another moment they walked off together, her arm under his,a gentle and embarrassed glance, and a "Good morning to you!"
being all that she had time for, as she passed away.
As soon as they were out of sight, the ladies of Captain Wentworth's partybegan talking of them.
"Mr Elliot does not dislike his cousin, I fancy?"
"Oh!
no, that is clear enough.
One can guess what will happen there.
He is always with them; half lives in the family, I believe.
What a very good-looking man!"
"Yes, and Miss Atkinson, who dined with him once at the Wallises,says he is the most agreeable man she ever was in company with."
"She is pretty, I think; Anne Elliot; very pretty, when one comesto look at her.
It is not the fashion to say so, but I confessI admire her more than her sister."
"Oh!
so do I."
"And so do I.
No comparison.
But the men are all wild after Miss Elliot.
Anne is too delicate for them."
Anne would have been particularly obliged to her cousin, if he would havewalked by her side all the way to Camden Place, without saying a word.
She had never found it so difficult to listen to him, though nothingcould exceed his solicitude and care, and though his subjectswere principally such as were wont to be always interesting:praise, warm, just, and discriminating, of Lady Russell,and insinuations highly rational against Mrs Clay.
But just nowshe could think only of Captain Wentworth.
She could not understandhis present feelings, whether he were really suffering muchfrom disappointment or not; and till that point were settled,she could not be quite herself.
She hoped to be wise and reasonable in time; but alas!
alas!
she must confess to herself that she was not wise yet.
Another circumstance very essential for her to know, was how longhe meant to be in Bath; he had not mentioned it, or she could notrecollect it.
He might be only passing through.
But it was more probablethat he should be come to stay.
In that case, so liable as every body wasto meet every body in Bath, Lady Russell would in all likelihoodsee him somewhere.
Would she recollect him?
How would it all be?
She had already been obliged to tell Lady Russell that Louisa Musgrovewas to marry Captain Benwick.
It had cost her something to encounterLady Russell's surprise; and now, if she were by any chanceto be thrown into company with Captain Wentworth, her imperfect knowledgeof the matter might add another shade of prejudice against him.
The following morning Anne was out with her friend, and for the first hour,in an incessant and fearful sort of watch for him in vain; but at last,in returning down Pulteney Street, she distinguished himon the right hand pavement at such a distance as to have him in viewthe greater part of the street.
There were many other men about him,many groups walking the same way, but there was no mistaking him.
She looked instinctively at Lady Russell; but not from any mad ideaof her recognising him so soon as she did herself.
No, it wasnot to be supposed that Lady Russell would perceive him till theywere nearly opposite.
She looked at her however, from time to time,anxiously; and when the moment approached which must point him out,though not daring to look again (for her own countenance she knewwas unfit to be seen), she was yet perfectly conscious ofLady Russell's eyes being turned exactly in the direction for him--of her being, in short, intently observing him.
She could thoroughlycomprehend the sort of fascination he must possess over Lady Russell's mind,the difficulty it must be for her to withdraw her eyes, the astonishmentshe must be feeling that eight or nine years should have passed over him,and in foreign climes and in active service too, without robbing himof one personal grace!
At last, Lady Russell drew back her head.
"Now, how would shespeak of him?"
"You will wonder," said she, "what has been fixing my eye so long;but I was looking after some window-curtains, which Lady Alicia andMrs Frankland were telling me of last night.
They describedthe drawing-room window-curtains of one of the houses on thisside of the way, and this part of the street, as being the handsomestand best hung of any in Bath, but could not recollect the exact number,and I have been trying to find out which it could be; but I confessI can see no curtains hereabouts that answer their description."
Anne sighed and blushed and smiled, in pity and disdain,either at her friend or herself.
The part which provoked her most,was that in all this waste of foresight and caution, she should havelost the right moment for seeing whether he saw them.
A day or two passed without producing anything.
The theatre or the rooms,where he was most likely to be, were not fashionable enoughfor the Elliots, whose evening amusements were solely in theelegant stupidity of private parties, in which they were gettingmore and more engaged; and Anne, wearied of such a state of stagnation,sick of knowing nothing, and fancying herself stronger becauseher strength was not tried, was quite impatient for the concert evening.
It was a concert for the benefit of a person patronised by Lady Dalrymple.
Of course they must attend.
It was really expected to be a good one,and Captain Wentworth was very fond of music.
If she could only havea few minutes conversation with him again, she fancied she shouldbe satisfied; and as to the power of addressing him, she felt all overcourage if the opportunity occurred.
Elizabeth had turned from him,Lady Russell overlooked him; her nerves were strengthenedby these circumstances; she felt that she owed him attention.
She had once partly promised Mrs Smith to spend the evening with her;but in a short hurried call she excused herself and put it off,with the more decided promise of a longer visit on the morrow.
Mrs Smith gave a most good-humoured acquiescence.
"By all means," said she; "only tell me all about it, when you do come.
Who is your party?"
Anne named them all.
Mrs Smith made no reply; but when she wasleaving her said, and with an expression half serious, half arch,"Well, I heartily wish your concert may answer; and do not fail meto-morrow if you can come; for I begin to have a forebodingthat I may not have many more visits from you."
Anne was startled and confused; but after standing in a moment's suspense,was obliged, and not sorry to be obliged, to hurry away.
Chapter 20Sir Walter, his two daughters, and Mrs Clay, were the earliestof all their party at the rooms in the evening; and as Lady Dalrymplemust be waited for, they took their station by one of the firesin the Octagon Room.
But hardly were they so settled, when the dooropened again, and Captain Wentworth walked in alone.
Anne wasthe nearest to him, and making yet a little advance, she instantly spoke.
He was preparing only to bow and pass on, but her gentle "How do you do?"
brought him out of the straight line to stand near her, and make enquiriesin return, in spite of the formidable father and sister in the back ground.
Their being in the back ground was a support to Anne; she knew nothingof their looks, and felt equal to everything which she believedright to be done.
While they were speaking, a whispering between her father and Elizabethcaught her ear.
She could not distinguish, but she must guess the subject;and on Captain Wentworth's making a distant bow, she comprehendedthat her father had judged so well as to give him thatsimple acknowledgement of acquaintance, and she was just in timeby a side glance to see a slight curtsey from Elizabeth herself.
This, though late, and reluctant, and ungracious, was yetbetter than nothing, and her spirits improved.
After talking, however, of the weather, and Bath, and the concert,their conversation began to flag, and so little was said at last,that she was expecting him to go every moment, but he did not;he seemed in no hurry to leave her; and presently with renewed spirit,with a little smile, a little glow, he said--"I have hardly seen you since our day at Lyme.
I am afraid you must havesuffered from the shock, and the more from its not overpowering youat the time."
She assured him that she had not.
"It was a frightful hour," said he, "a frightful day!"
and hepassed his hand across his eyes, as if the remembrance were stilltoo painful, but in a moment, half smiling again, added,"The day has produced some effects however; has had some consequenceswhich must be considered as the very reverse of frightful.
When you had the presence of mind to suggest that Benwick would bethe properest person to fetch a surgeon, you could have little ideaof his being eventually one of those most concerned in her recovery."
"Certainly I could have none.
But it appears--I should hope it would bea very happy match.
There are on both sides good principlesand good temper."
"Yes," said he, looking not exactly forward; "but there, I think,ends the resemblance.
With all my soul I wish them happy, and rejoiceover every circumstance in favour of it.
They have no difficultiesto contend with at home, no opposition, no caprice, no delays.
The Musgroves are behaving like themselves, most honourably and kindly,only anxious with true parental hearts to promote their daughter's comfort.
All this is much, very much in favour of their happiness;more than perhaps--"He stopped.
A sudden recollection seemed to occur, and to give himsome taste of that emotion which was reddening Anne's cheeksand fixing her eyes on the ground.
After clearing his throat, however,he proceeded thus--"I confess that I do think there is a disparity, too great a disparity,and in a point no less essential than mind.
I regard Louisa Musgroveas a very amiable, sweet-tempered girl, and not deficient in understanding,but Benwick is something more.
He is a clever man, a reading man;and I confess, that I do consider his attaching himself to herwith some surprise.
Had it been the effect of gratitude,had he learnt to love her, because he believed her to be preferring him,it would have been another thing.
But I have no reason to suppose it so.
It seems, on the contrary, to have been a perfectly spontaneous,untaught feeling on his side, and this surprises me.
A man like him,in his situation!
with a heart pierced, wounded, almost broken!
Fanny Harville was a very superior creature, and his attachment to herwas indeed attachment.
A man does not recover from sucha devotion of the heart to such a woman.
He ought not; he does not."
Either from the consciousness, however, that his friend had recovered,or from other consciousness, he went no farther; and Anne who,in spite of the agitated voice in which the latter part had been uttered,and in spite of all the various noises of the room, the almost ceaselessslam of the door, and ceaseless buzz of persons walking through,had distinguished every word, was struck, gratified, confused,and beginning to breathe very quick, and feel an hundred thingsin a moment.
It was impossible for her to enter on such a subject;and yet, after a pause, feeling the necessity of speaking,and having not the smallest wish for a total change, she only deviatedso far as to say--"You were a good while at Lyme, I think?"
"About a fortnight.
I could not leave it till Louisa's doing wellwas quite ascertained.
I had been too deeply concerned in the mischiefto be soon at peace.
It had been my doing, solely mine.
She would not have been obstinate if I had not been weak.
The country round Lyme is very fine.
I walked and rode a great deal;and the more I saw, the more I found to admire."
"I should very much like to see Lyme again," said Anne.
"Indeed!
I should not have supposed that you could have foundanything in Lyme to inspire such a feeling.
The horror and distressyou were involved in, the stretch of mind, the wear of spirits!
I should have thought your last impressions of Lyme must have beenstrong disgust."
"The last hours were certainly very painful," replied Anne;"but when pain is over, the remembrance of it often becomes a pleasure.
One does not love a place the less for having suffered in it,unless it has been all suffering, nothing but suffering, which wasby no means the case at Lyme.
We were only in anxiety and distressduring the last two hours, and previously there had been a great dealof enjoyment.
So much novelty and beauty!
I have travelled so little,that every fresh place would be interesting to me; but there is real beautyat Lyme; and in short" (with a faint blush at some recollections),"altogether my impressions of the place are very agreeable."
As she ceased, the entrance door opened again, and the very party appearedfor whom they were waiting.
"Lady Dalrymple, Lady Dalrymple,"was the rejoicing sound; and with all the eagerness compatiblewith anxious elegance, Sir Walter and his two ladies stepped forwardto meet her.
Lady Dalrymple and Miss Carteret, escorted by Mr Elliotand Colonel Wallis, who had happened to arrive nearly at the same instant,advanced into the room.
The others joined them, and it wasa group in which Anne found herself also necessarily included.
She was divided from Captain Wentworth.
Their interesting,almost too interesting conversation must be broken up for a time,but slight was the penance compared with the happiness which brought it on!
She had learnt, in the last ten minutes, more of his feelingstowards Louisa, more of all his feelings than she dared to think of;and she gave herself up to the demands of the party, to the needfulcivilities of the moment, with exquisite, though agitated sensations.
She was in good humour with all.
She had received ideas whichdisposed her to be courteous and kind to all, and to pity every one,as being less happy than herself.
The delightful emotions were a little subdued, when on stepping backfrom the group, to be joined again by Captain Wentworth, she sawthat he was gone.
She was just in time to see him turn intothe Concert Room.
He was gone; he had disappeared, she felta moment's regret.
But "they should meet again.
He would look for her,he would find her out before the evening were over, and at present,perhaps, it was as well to be asunder.
She was in need ofa little interval for recollection."
Upon Lady Russell's appearance soon afterwards, the whole partywas collected, and all that remained was to marshal themselves,and proceed into the Concert Room; and be of all the consequencein their power, draw as many eyes, excite as many whispers,and disturb as many people as they could.
Very, very happy were both Elizabeth and Anne Elliot as they walked in.
Elizabeth arm in arm with Miss Carteret, and looking on the broad backof the dowager Viscountess Dalrymple before her, had nothing to wish forwhich did not seem within her reach; and Anne--but it would bean insult to the nature of Anne's felicity, to draw any comparisonbetween it and her sister's; the origin of one all selfish vanity,of the other all generous attachment.
Anne saw nothing, thought nothing of the brilliancy of the room.
Her happiness was from within.
Her eyes were bright and her cheeks glowed;but she knew nothing about it.
She was thinking only ofthe last half hour, and as they passed to their seats, her mind tooka hasty range over it.
His choice of subjects, his expressions,and still more his manner and look, had been such as she could seein only one light.
His opinion of Louisa Musgrove's inferiority,an opinion which he had seemed solicitous to give, his wonderat Captain Benwick, his feelings as to a first, strong attachment;sentences begun which he could not finish, his half averted eyesand more than half expressive glance, all, all declared that he hada heart returning to her at least; that anger, resentment, avoidance,were no more; and that they were succeeded, not merely by friendshipand regard, but by the tenderness of the past.
Yes, some share ofthe tenderness of the past.
She could not contemplate the changeas implying less.
He must love her.
These were thoughts, with their attendant visions, which occupiedand flurried her too much to leave her any power of observation;and she passed along the room without having a glimpse of him,without even trying to discern him.
When their places were determined on,and they were all properly arranged, she looked round to seeif he should happen to be in the same part of the room, but he was not;her eye could not reach him; and the concert being just opening,she must consent for a time to be happy in a humbler way.
The party was divided and disposed of on two contiguous benches:Anne was among those on the foremost, and Mr Elliot had manoeuvred so well,with the assistance of his friend Colonel Wallis, as to have a seat by her.
Miss Elliot, surrounded by her cousins, and the principal objectof Colonel Wallis's gallantry, was quite contented.
Anne's mind was in a most favourable state for the entertainmentof the evening; it was just occupation enough:  she had feelings forthe tender, spirits for the gay, attention for the scientific,and patience for the wearisome; and had never liked a concert better,at least during the first act.
Towards the close of it,in the interval succeeding an Italian song, she explainedthe words of the song to Mr Elliot.
They had a concert bill between them.
"This," said she, "is nearly the sense, or rather the meaning of the words,for certainly the sense of an Italian love-song must not be talked of,but it is as nearly the meaning as I can give; for I do not pretendto understand the language.
I am a very poor Italian scholar."
"Yes, yes, I see you are.
I see you know nothing of the matter.
You have only knowledge enough of the language to translate at sightthese inverted, transposed, curtailed Italian lines, into clear,comprehensible, elegant English.
You need not say anything moreof your ignorance.
Here is complete proof."
"I will not oppose such kind politeness; but I should be sorry to beexamined by a real proficient."
"I have not had the pleasure of visiting in Camden Place so long,"replied he, "without knowing something of Miss Anne Elliot;and I do regard her as one who is too modest for the world in generalto be aware of half her accomplishments, and too highly accomplishedfor modesty to be natural in any other woman."
"For shame!
for shame!
this is too much flattery.
I forget what we areto have next," turning to the bill.
"Perhaps," said Mr Elliot, speaking low, "I have had a longer acquaintancewith your character than you are aware of."
"Indeed!
How so?
You can have been acquainted with it only sinceI came to Bath, excepting as you might hear me previously spoken ofin my own family."
"I knew you by report long before you came to Bath.
I had heard youdescribed by those who knew you intimately.
I have been acquaintedwith you by character many years.
Your person, your disposition,accomplishments, manner; they were all present to me."
Mr Elliot was not disappointed in the interest he hoped to raise.
No one can withstand the charm of such a mystery.
To have beendescribed long ago to a recent acquaintance, by nameless people,is irresistible; and Anne was all curiosity.
She wondered,and questioned him eagerly; but in vain.
He delighted in being asked,but he would not tell.
"No, no, some time or other, perhaps, but not now.
He would mentionno names now; but such, he could assure her, had been the fact.
He had many years ago received such a description of Miss Anne Elliotas had inspired him with the highest idea of her merit, and excitedthe warmest curiosity to know her."
Anne could think of no one so likely to have spoken withpartiality of her many years ago as the Mr Wentworth of Monkford,Captain Wentworth's brother.
He might have been in Mr Elliot's company,but she had not courage to ask the question.
"The name of Anne Elliot," said he, "has long had an interesting sound to me.
Very long has it possessed a charm over my fancy; and, if I dared,I would breathe my wishes that the name might never change."
Such, she believed, were his words; but scarcely had shereceived their sound, than her attention was caught by other soundsimmediately behind her, which rendered every thing else trivial.
Her father and Lady Dalrymple were speaking.
"A well-looking man," said Sir Walter, "a very well-looking man."
"A very fine young man indeed!"
said Lady Dalrymple.
"More airthan one often sees in Bath.
Irish, I dare say."
"No, I just know his name.
A bowing acquaintance.
Wentworth;Captain Wentworth of the navy.
His sister married my tenantin Somersetshire, the Croft, who rents Kellynch."
Before Sir Walter had reached this point, Anne's eyes had caughtthe right direction, and distinguished Captain Wentworth standingamong a cluster of men at a little distance.
As her eyes fell on him,his seemed to be withdrawn from her.
It had that appearance.
It seemed as if she had been one moment too late; and as long as shedared observe, he did not look again:  but the performancewas recommencing, and she was forced to seem to restore her attentionto the orchestra and look straight forward.
When she could give another glance, he had moved away.
He could not havecome nearer to her if he would; she was so surrounded and shut in:but she would rather have caught his eye.
Mr Elliot's speech, too, distressed her.
She had no longerany inclination to talk to him.
She wished him not so near her.
The first act was over.
Now she hoped for some beneficial change;and, after a period of nothing-saying amongst the party, some of themdid decide on going in quest of tea.
Anne was one of the few whodid not choose to move.
She remained in her seat, and so did Lady Russell;but she had the pleasure of getting rid of Mr Elliot; and she did not mean,whatever she might feel on Lady Russell's account, to shrink fromconversation with Captain Wentworth, if he gave her the opportunity.
She was persuaded by Lady Russell's countenance that she had seen him.
He did not come however.
Anne sometimes fancied she discerned himat a distance, but he never came.
The anxious intervalwore away unproductively.
The others returned, the room filled again,benches were reclaimed and repossessed, and another hour of pleasureor of penance was to be sat out, another hour of music was to givedelight or the gapes, as real or affected taste for it prevailed.
To Anne, it chiefly wore the prospect of an hour of agitation.
She could not quit that room in peace without seeing Captain Wentworthonce more, without the interchange of one friendly look.
In re-settling themselves there were now many changes, the result of whichwas favourable for her.
Colonel Wallis declined sitting down again,and Mr Elliot was invited by Elizabeth and Miss Carteret, in a mannernot to be refused, to sit between them; and by some other removals,and a little scheming of her own,  Anne was enabled to place herselfmuch nearer the end of the bench than she had been before,much more within reach of a passer-by.
She could not do so,without comparing herself with Miss Larolles, the inimitable Miss Larolles;but still she did it, and not with much happier effect;though by what seemed prosperity in the shape of an early abdicationin her next neighbours, she found herself at the very end of the benchbefore the concert closed.
Such was her situation, with a vacant space at hand, when Captain Wentworthwas again in sight.
She saw him not far off.
He saw her too;yet he looked grave, and seemed irresolute, and only by very slow degreescame at last near enough to speak to her.
She felt that somethingmust be the matter.
The change was indubitable.
The differencebetween his present air and what it had been in the Octagon Roomwas strikingly great.
Why was it?
She thought of her father,of Lady Russell.
Could there have been any unpleasant glances?
He began by speaking of the concert gravely, more like the CaptainWentworth of Uppercross; owned himself disappointed, had expected singing;and in short, must confess that he should not be sorry when it was over.
Anne replied, and spoke in defence of the performance so well,and yet in allowance for his feelings so pleasantly, that his countenanceimproved, and he replied again with almost a smile.
They talkedfor a few minutes more; the improvement held; he even looked downtowards the bench, as if he saw a place on it well worth occupying;when at that moment a touch on her shoulder obliged Anne to turn round.
It came from Mr Elliot.
He begged her pardon, but she must be applied to,to explain Italian again.
Miss Carteret was very anxious to havea general idea of what was next to be sung.
Anne could not refuse;but never had she sacrificed to politeness with a more suffering spirit.
A few minutes, though as few as possible, were inevitably consumed;and when her own mistress again, when able to turn and lookas she had done before, she found herself accosted by Captain Wentworth,in a reserved yet hurried sort of farewell.
"He must wish her good night;he was going; he should get home as fast as he could."
"Is not this song worth staying for?"
said Anne, suddenly struckby an idea which made her yet more anxious to be encouraging.
"No!"
he replied impressively, "there is nothing worth my staying for;"and he was gone directly.
Jealousy of Mr Elliot!
It was the only intelligible motive.
Captain Wentworth jealous of her affection!
Could she have believed ita week ago; three hours ago!
For a moment the gratification was exquisite.
But, alas!
there were very different thoughts to succeed.
How was such jealousy to be quieted?
How was the truth to reach him?
How, in all the peculiar disadvantages of their respective situations,would he ever learn of her real sentiments?
It was misery to thinkof Mr Elliot's attentions.
Their evil was incalculable.
Chapter 21Anne recollected with pleasure the next morning her promiseof going to Mrs Smith, meaning that it should engage her from homeat the time when Mr Elliot would be most likely to call; for to avoidMr Elliot was almost a first object.
She felt a great deal of good-will towards him.
In spite ofthe mischief of his attentions, she owed him gratitude and regard,perhaps compassion.
She could not help thinking much of the extraordinarycircumstances attending their acquaintance, of the right whichhe seemed to have to interest her, by everything in situation,by his own sentiments, by his early prepossession.
It was altogethervery extraordinary; flattering, but painful.
There was much to regret.
How she might have felt had there been no Captain Wentworth in the case,was not worth enquiry; for there was a Captain Wentworth;and be the conclusion of the present suspense good or bad,her affection would be his for ever.
Their union, she believed,could not divide her more from other men, than their final separation.
Prettier musings of high-wrought love and eternal constancy,could never have passed along the streets of Bath, than Annewas sporting with from Camden Place to Westgate Buildings.
It was almost enough to spread purification and perfume all the way.
She was sure of a pleasant reception; and her friend seemed this morningparticularly obliged to her for coming, seemed hardly to have expected her,though it had been an appointment.
An account of the concert was immediately claimed; and Anne's recollectionsof the concert were quite happy enough to animate her featuresand make her rejoice to talk of it.
All that she could tellshe told most gladly, but the all was little for one who had been there,and unsatisfactory for such an enquirer as Mrs Smith, who hadalready heard, through the short cut of a laundress and a waiter,rather more of the general success and produce of the eveningthan Anne could relate, and who now asked in vain for several particularsof the company.
Everybody of any consequence or notoriety in Bathwas well know by name to Mrs Smith.
"The little Durands were there, I conclude," said she, "with their mouthsopen to catch the music, like unfledged sparrows ready to be fed.
They never miss a concert."
"Yes; I did not see them myself, but I heard Mr Elliot say they werein the room."
"The Ibbotsons, were they there?
and the two new beauties,with the tall Irish officer, who is talked of for one of them."
"I do not know.
I do not think they were."
"Old Lady Mary Maclean?
I need not ask after her.
She never misses,I know; and you must have seen her.
She must have been in your own circle;for as you went with Lady Dalrymple, you were in the seats of grandeur,round the orchestra, of course."
"No, that was what I dreaded.
It would have been very unpleasant to mein every respect.
But happily Lady Dalrymple always choosesto be farther off; and we were exceedingly well placed, that is,for hearing; I must not say for seeing, because I appear to have seenvery little."
"Oh!
you saw enough for your own amusement.
I can understand.
There is a sort of domestic enjoyment to be known even in a crowd,and this you had.
You were a large party in yourselves,and you wanted nothing beyond."
"But I ought to have looked about me more," said Anne, consciouswhile she spoke that there had in fact been no want of looking about,that the object only had been deficient.
"No, no; you were better employed.
You need not tell me that youhad a pleasant evening.
I see it in your eye.
I perfectly seehow the hours passed:  that you had always something agreeableto listen to.
In the intervals of the concert it was conversation."
Anne half smiled and said, "Do you see that in my eye?"
"Yes, I do.
Your countenance perfectly informs me that you werein company last night with the person whom you think the most agreeablein the world, the person who interests you at this present timemore than all the rest of the world put together."
A blush overspread Anne's cheeks.
She could say nothing.
"And such being the case," continued Mrs Smith, after a short pause,"I hope you believe that I do know how to value your kindnessin coming to me this morning.
It is really very good of youto come and sit with me, when you must have so many pleasanter demandsupon your time."
Anne heard nothing of this.
She was still in the astonishment andconfusion excited by her friend's penetration, unable to imaginehow any report of Captain Wentworth could have reached her.
After another short silence--"Pray," said Mrs Smith, "is Mr Elliot aware of your acquaintance with me?
Does he know that I am in Bath?"
"Mr Elliot!"
repeated Anne, looking up surprised.
A moment's reflectionshewed her the mistake she had been under.
She caught it instantaneously;and recovering her courage with the feeling of safety, soon added,more composedly, "Are you acquainted with Mr Elliot?"
"I have been a good deal acquainted with him," replied Mrs Smith, gravely,"but it seems worn out now.
It is a great while since we met."
"I was not at all aware of this.
You never mentioned it before.
Had I known it, I would have had the pleasure of talking to him about you."
"To confess the truth," said Mrs Smith, assuming her usualair of cheerfulness, "that is exactly the pleasure I want you to have.
I want you to talk about me to Mr Elliot.
I want your interest with him.
He can be of essential service to me; and if you would have the goodness,my dear Miss Elliot, to make it an object to yourself,of course it is done."
"I should be extremely happy; I hope you cannot doubt my willingnessto be of even the slightest use to you," replied Anne; "but I suspectthat you are considering me as having a higher claim on Mr Elliot,a greater right to influence him, than is really the case.
I am sure you have, somehow or other, imbibed such a notion.
You must consider me only as Mr Elliot's relation.
If in that lightthere is anything which you suppose his cousin might fairly ask of him,I beg you would not hesitate to employ me."
Mrs Smith gave her a penetrating glance, and then, smiling, said--"I have been a little premature, I perceive; I beg your pardon.
I ought to have waited for official information,  But now, my dearMiss Elliot, as an old friend, do give me a hint as to when I may speak.
Next week?
To be sure by next week I may be allowed tothink it all settled, and build my own selfish schemes onMr Elliot's good fortune."
"No," replied Anne, "nor next week, nor next, nor next.
I assure you that nothing of the sort you are thinking ofwill be settled any week.
I am not going to marry Mr Elliot.
I should like to know why you imagine I am?"
Mrs Smith looked at her again, looked earnestly, smiled,shook her head, and exclaimed--"Now, how I do wish I understood you!
How I do wish I knewwhat you were at!
I have a great idea that you do not design to be cruel,when the right moment occurs.
Till it does come, you know,we women never mean to have anybody.
It is a thing of course among us,that every man is refused, till he offers.
But why should you be cruel?
Let me plead for my--present friend I cannot call him, but formy former friend.
Where can you look for a more suitable match?
Where could you expect a more gentlemanlike, agreeable man?
Let me recommend Mr Elliot.
I am sure you hear nothing but good of himfrom Colonel Wallis; and who can know him better than Colonel Wallis?"
"My dear Mrs Smith, Mr Elliot's wife has not been dead much abovehalf a year.
He ought not to be supposed to be paying his addressesto any one."
"Oh!
if these are your only objections," cried Mrs Smith, archly,"Mr Elliot is safe, and I shall give myself no more trouble about him.
Do not forget me when you are married, that's all.
Let him know me to bea friend of yours, and then he will think little of the trouble required,which it is very natural for him now, with so many affairs and engagementsof his own, to avoid and get rid of as he can; very natural, perhaps.
Ninety-nine out of a hundred would do the same.
Of course,he cannot be aware of the importance to me.
Well, my dear Miss Elliot,I hope and trust you will be very happy.
Mr Elliot has senseto understand the value of such a woman.
Your peace will not beshipwrecked as mine has been.
You are safe in all worldly matters,and safe in his character.
He will not be led astray; he will not bemisled by others to his ruin."
"No," said Anne, "I can readily believe all that of my cousin.
He seems to have a calm decided temper, not at all opento dangerous impressions.
I consider him with great respect.
I have no reason, from any thing that has fallen within my observation,to do otherwise.
But I have not known him long; and he is not a man,I think, to be known intimately soon.
Will not this mannerof speaking of him, Mrs Smith, convince you that he is nothing to me?
Surely this must be calm enough.
And, upon my word, he is nothing to me.
Should he ever propose to me (which I have very little reason to imaginehe has any thought of doing), I shall not accept him.
I assure youI shall not.
I assure you, Mr Elliot had not the share whichyou have been supposing, in whatever pleasure the concertof last night might afford:  not Mr Elliot; it is not Mr Elliot that--"She stopped, regretting with a deep blush that she had implied so much;but less would hardly have been sufficient.
Mrs Smith would hardlyhave believed so soon in Mr Elliot's failure, but from the perceptionof there being a somebody else.
As it was, she instantly submitted,and with all the semblance of seeing nothing beyond; and Anne,eager to escape farther notice, was impatient to know why Mrs Smithshould have fancied she was to marry Mr Elliot; where she could havereceived the idea, or from whom she could have heard it.
"Do tell me how it first came into your head."
"It first came into my head," replied Mrs Smith, "upon finding how muchyou were together, and feeling it to be the most probable thingin the world to be wished for by everybody belonging to either of you;and you may depend upon it that all your acquaintance have disposed of youin the same way.
But I never heard it spoken of till two days ago."
"And has it indeed been spoken of?"
"Did you observe the woman who opened the door to you whenyou called yesterday?"
"No.
Was not it Mrs Speed, as usual, or the maid?
I observedno one in particular."
"It was my friend Mrs Rooke; Nurse Rooke; who, by-the-bye,had a great curiosity to see you, and was delighted to be in the wayto let you in.
She came away from Marlborough Buildings only on Sunday;and she it was who told me you were to marry Mr Elliot.
She had had it from Mrs Wallis herself, which did not seem bad authority.
She sat an hour with me on Monday evening, and gave me the whole history."
"The whole history," repeated Anne, laughing.
"She could not makea very long history, I think, of one such little articleof unfounded news."
Mrs Smith said nothing.
"But," continued Anne, presently, "though there is no truth in my havingthis claim on Mr Elliot, I should be extremely happy to be of use to youin any way that I could.
Shall I mention to him your being in Bath?
Shall I take any message?"
"No, I thank you:  no, certainly not.
In the warmth of the moment,and under a mistaken impression, I might, perhaps, have endeavouredto interest you in some circumstances; but not now.
No, I thank you,I have nothing to trouble you with."
"I think you spoke of having known Mr Elliot many years?"
"I did."
"Not before he was married, I suppose?"
"Yes; he was not married when I knew him first."
"And--were you much acquainted?"
"Intimately."
"Indeed!
Then do tell me what he was at that time of life.
I have a great curiosity to know what Mr Elliot was as a very young man.
Was he at all such as he appears now?"
"I have not seen Mr Elliot these three years," was Mrs Smith's answer,given so gravely that it was impossible to pursue the subject farther;and Anne felt that she had gained nothing but an increase of curiosity.
They were both silent:  Mrs Smith very thoughtful.
At last--"I beg your pardon, my dear Miss Elliot," she cried, in hernatural tone of cordiality, "I beg your pardon for the short answersI have been giving you, but I have been uncertain what I ought to do.
I have been doubting and considering as to what I ought to tell you.
There were many things to be taken into the account.
One hatesto be officious, to be giving bad impressions, making mischief.
Even the smooth surface of family-union seems worth preserving,though there may be nothing durable beneath.
However, I have determined;I think I am right; I think you ought to be made acquaintedwith Mr Elliot's real character.
Though I fully believe that,at present, you have not the smallest intention of accepting him,there is no saying what may happen.
You might, some time or other,be differently affected towards him.
Hear the truth, therefore,now, while you are unprejudiced.
Mr Elliot is a man without heartor conscience; a designing, wary, cold-blooded being, who thinksonly of himself; whom for his own interest or ease, would be guiltyof any cruelty, or any treachery, that could be perpetrated withoutrisk of his general character.
He has no feeling for others.
Those whom he has been the chief cause of leading into ruin,he can neglect and desert without the smallest compunction.
He is totally beyond the reach of any sentiment of justice or compassion.
Oh!
he is black at heart, hollow and black!"
Anne's astonished air, and exclamation of wonder, made her pause,and in a calmer manner, she added,"My expressions startle you.
You must allow for an injured, angry woman.
But I will try to command myself.
I will not abuse him.
I will only tell you what I have found him.
Facts shall speak.
He was the intimate friend of my dear husband, who trusted and loved him,and thought him as good as himself.
The intimacy had been formedbefore our marriage.
I found them most intimate friends; and I, too,became excessively pleased with Mr Elliot, and entertainedthe highest opinion of him.
At nineteen, you know, one does notthink very seriously; but Mr Elliot appeared to me quite as good as others,and much more agreeable than most others, and we were almostalways together.
We were principally in town, living in very good style.
He was then the inferior in circumstances; he was then the poor one;he had chambers in the Temple, and it was as much as he could doto support the appearance of a gentleman.
He had always a homewith us whenever he chose it; he was always welcome; he was like a brother.
My poor Charles, who had the finest, most generous spirit in the world,would have divided his last farthing with him; and I know that his pursewas open to him; I know that he often assisted him."
"This must have been about that very period of Mr Elliot's life,"said Anne, "which has always excited my particular curiosity.
It must have been about the same time that he became known tomy father and sister.
I never knew him myself; I only heard of him;but there was a something in his conduct then, with regard tomy father and sister, and afterwards in the circumstances of his marriage,which I never could quite reconcile with present times.
It seemedto announce a different sort of man."
"I know it all, I know it all," cried Mrs Smith.
"He had beenintroduced to Sir Walter and your sister before I was acquainted with him,but I heard him speak of them for ever.
I know he was invitedand encouraged, and I know he did not choose to go.
I can satisfy you,perhaps, on points which you would little expect; and as to his marriage,I knew all about it at the time.
I was privy to all the fors and againsts;I was the friend to whom he confided his hopes and plans; and thoughI did not know his wife previously, her inferior situation in society,indeed, rendered that impossible, yet I knew her all her life afterwards,or at least till within the last two years of her life, and can answerany question you may wish to put."
"Nay," said Anne, "I have no particular enquiry to make about her.
I have always understood they were not a happy couple.
But I shouldlike to know why, at that time of his life, he should slightmy father's acquaintance as he did.
My father was certainly disposedto take very kind and proper notice of him.
Why did Mr Elliot draw back?"
"Mr Elliot," replied Mrs Smith, "at that period of his life,had one object in view:  to make his fortune, and by a rather quickerprocess than the law.
He was determined to make it by marriage.
He was determined, at least, not to mar it by an imprudent marriage;and I know it was his belief (whether justly or not, of courseI cannot decide), that your father and sister, in their civilitiesand invitations, were designing a match between the heirand the young lady, and it was impossible that such a matchshould have answered his ideas of wealth and independence.
That was his motive for drawing back, I can assure you.
He told me the whole story.
He had no concealments with me.
It was curious, that having just left you behind me in Bath,my first and principal acquaintance on marrying should be your cousin;and that, through him, I should be continually hearing of your fatherand sister.
He described one Miss Elliot, and I thoughtvery affectionately of the other."
"Perhaps," cried Anne, struck by a sudden idea, "you sometimesspoke of me to Mr Elliot?"
"To be sure I did; very often.
I used to boast of my own Anne Elliot,and vouch for your being a very different creature from--"She checked herself just in time.
"This accounts for something which Mr Elliot said last night,"cried Anne.
"This explains it.
I found he had been used to hear of me.
I could not comprehend how.
What wild imaginations one forms wheredear self is concerned!
How sure to be mistaken!
But I beg your pardon;I have interrupted you.
Mr Elliot married then completely for money?
The circumstances, probably, which first opened your eyesto his character."
Mrs Smith hesitated a little here.
"Oh!
those things are too common.
When one lives in the world, a man or woman's marrying for moneyis too common to strike one as it ought.
I was very young,and associated only with the young, and we were a thoughtless,gay set, without any strict rules of conduct.
We lived for enjoyment.
I think differently now; time and sickness and sorrow have given meother notions; but at that period I must own I saw nothing reprehensiblein what Mr Elliot was doing.
`To do the best for himself,'passed as a duty."
"But was not she a very low woman?"
"Yes; which I objected to, but he would not regard.
Money, money,was all that he wanted.
Her father was a grazier, her grandfatherhad been a butcher, but that was all nothing.
She was a fine woman,had had a decent education, was brought forward by some cousins,thrown by chance into Mr Elliot's company, and fell in love with him;and not a difficulty or a scruple was there on his side,with respect to her birth.
All his caution was spent in being securedof the real amount of her fortune, before he committed himself.
Depend upon it, whatever esteem Mr Elliot may have for his own situationin life now, as a young man he had not the smallest value for it.
His chance for the Kellynch estate was something, but all the honourof the family he held as cheap as dirt.
I have often heard him declare,that if baronetcies were saleable, anybody should have hisfor fifty pounds, arms and motto, name and livery included;but I will not pretend to repeat half that I used to hear him sayon that subject.
It would not be fair; and yet you ought to have proof,for what is all this but assertion, and you shall have proof."
"Indeed, my dear Mrs Smith, I want none," cried Anne.
"You have assertednothing contradictory to what Mr Elliot appeared to be some years ago.
This is all in confirmation, rather, of what we used to hear and believe.
I am more curious to know why he should be so different now."
"But for my satisfaction, if you will have the goodness to ring for Mary;stay:  I am sure you will have the still greater goodness ofgoing yourself into my bedroom, and bringing me the small inlaid boxwhich you will find on the upper shelf of the closet."
Anne, seeing her friend to be earnestly bent on it, did as she was desired.
The box was brought and placed before her, and Mrs Smith, sighing over itas she unlocked it, said--"This is full of papers belonging to him, to my husband;a small portion only of what I had to look over when I lost him.
The letter I am looking for was one written by Mr Elliot to himbefore our marriage, and happened to be saved; why, one can hardly imagine.
But he was careless and immethodical, like other men, about those things;and when I came to examine his papers, I found it with othersstill more trivial, from different people scattered here and there,while many letters and memorandums of real importance had been destroyed.
Here it is; I would not burn it, because being even then very littlesatisfied with Mr Elliot, I was determined to preserve every documentof former intimacy.
I have now another motive for being gladthat I can produce it."
This was the letter, directed to "Charles Smith, Esq.
Tunbridge Wells,"and dated from London, as far back as July, 1803: --"Dear Smith,--I have received yours.
Your kindness almost overpowers me.
I wish nature had made such hearts as yours more common, but I havelived three-and-twenty years in the world, and have seen none like it.
At present, believe me, I have no need of your services,being in cash again.
Give me joy:  I have got rid of Sir Walter and Miss.
They are gone back to Kellynch, and almost made me swear to visit themthis summer; but my first visit to Kellynch will be with a surveyor,to tell me how to bring it with best advantage to the hammer.
The baronet, nevertheless, is not unlikely to marry again;he is quite fool enough.
If he does, however, they will leave me in peace,which may be a decent equivalent  for the reversion.
He is worsethan last year.
"I wish I had any name but Elliot.
I am sick of it.
The name of WalterI can drop, thank God!
and I desire you will never insult mewith my second W. again, meaning, for the rest of my life,to be only yours truly,--Wm.
Elliot."
Such a letter could not be read without putting Anne in a glow;and Mrs Smith, observing the high colour in her face, said--"The language, I know, is highly disrespectful.
Though I have forgotthe exact terms, I have a perfect impression of the general meaning.
But it shows you the man.
Mark his professions to my poor husband.
Can any thing be stronger?"
Anne could not immediately get over the shock and mortificationof finding such words applied to her father.
She was obliged to recollectthat her seeing the letter was a violation of the laws of honour,that no one ought to be judged or to be known by such testimonies,that no private correspondence could bear the eye of others,before she could recover calmness enough to return the letterwhich she had been meditating over, and say--"Thank you.
This is full proof undoubtedly; proof of every thingyou were saying.
But why be acquainted with us now?"
"I can explain this too," cried Mrs Smith, smiling.
"Can you really?"
"Yes.
I have shewn you Mr Elliot as he was a dozen years ago,and I will shew him as he is now.
I cannot produce written proof again,but I can give as authentic oral testimony as you can desire, of whathe is now wanting, and what he is now doing.
He is no hypocrite now.
He truly wants to marry you.
His present attentions to your familyare very sincere:  quite from the heart.
I will give you my authority:his friend Colonel Wallis."
"Colonel Wallis!
you are acquainted with him?"
"No.
It does not come to me in quite so direct a line as that;it takes a bend or two, but nothing of consequence.
The streamis as good as at first; the little rubbish it collects in the turningsis easily moved away.
Mr Elliot talks unreservedly to Colonel Wallisof his views on you, which said Colonel Wallis, I imagine to be,in himself, a sensible, careful, discerning sort of character;but Colonel Wallis has a very pretty silly wife, to whomhe tells things which he had better not, and he repeats it all to her.
She in the overflowing spirits of her recovery, repeats it allto her nurse; and the nurse  knowing my acquaintance with you,very naturally brings it all to me.
On Monday evening, my good friendMrs Rooke let me thus much into the secrets of Marlborough Buildings.
When I talked of a whole history, therefore, you see I wasnot romancing so much as you supposed."
"My dear Mrs Smith, your authority is deficient.
This will not do.
Mr Elliot's having any views on me will not in the least accountfor the efforts he made towards a reconciliation with my father.
That was all prior to my coming to Bath.
I found them onthe most friendly terms when I arrived."
"I know you did; I know it all perfectly, but--""Indeed, Mrs Smith, we must not expect to get real informationin such a line.
Facts or opinions which are to pass through the handsof so many, to be misconceived by folly in one, and ignorance in another,can hardly have much truth left."
"Only give me a hearing.
You will soon be able to judge ofthe general credit due, by listening to some particularswhich you can yourself immediately contradict or confirm.
Nobody supposes that you were his first inducement.
He had seen youindeed, before he came to Bath, and admired you, but withoutknowing it to be you.
So says my historian, at least.
Is this true?
Did he see you last summer or autumn, `somewhere down in the west,'to use her own words, without knowing it to be you?"
"He certainly did.
So far it is very true.
At Lyme.
I happened to be at Lyme."
"Well," continued Mrs Smith, triumphantly, "grant my friend the creditdue to the establishment of the first point asserted.
He saw you thenat Lyme, and liked you so well as to be exceedingly pleasedto meet with you again in Camden Place, as Miss Anne Elliot,and from that moment, I have no doubt, had a double motivein his visits there.
But there was another, and an earlier,which I will now explain.
If there is anything in my story which you knowto be either false or improbable, stop me.
My account states,that your sister's friend, the lady now staying with you,whom I have heard you mention, came to Bath with Miss Elliot and Sir Walteras long ago as September (in short when they first came themselves),and has been staying there ever since; that she is a clever, insinuating,handsome woman, poor and plausible, and altogether such in situationand manner, as to give a general idea, among Sir Walter's acquaintance,of her meaning to be Lady Elliot, and as general a surprisethat Miss Elliot should be apparently, blind to the danger."
Here Mrs Smith paused a moment; but Anne had not a word to say,and she continued--"This was the light in which it appeared to those who knew the family,long before you returned to it; and Colonel Wallis had his eyeupon your father enough to be sensible of it, though he did not thenvisit in Camden Place; but his regard for Mr Elliot gave him an interestin watching all that was going on there, and when Mr Elliot came to Bathfor a day or two, as he happened to do a little before Christmas,Colonel Wallis made him acquainted with the appearance of things,and the reports beginning to prevail.
Now you are to understand,that time had worked a very material change in Mr Elliot's opinionsas to the value of a baronetcy.
Upon all points of blood and connexionhe is a completely altered man.
Having long had as much moneyas he could spend, nothing to wish for on the side of avariceor indulgence, he has been gradually learning to pin his happinessupon the consequence he is heir to.
I thought it coming onbefore our acquaintance ceased, but it is now a confirmed feeling.
He cannot bear the idea of not being Sir William.
You may guess,therefore, that the news he heard from his friend could not bevery agreeable, and you may guess what it produced; the resolutionof coming back to Bath as soon as possible, and of fixing himself herefor a time, with the view of renewing his former acquaintance,and recovering such a footing in the family as might give him the meansof ascertaining the degree of his danger, and of circumventing the ladyif he found it material.
This was agreed upon between the two friendsas the only thing to be done; and Colonel Wallis was to assistin every way that he could.
He was to be introduced, and Mrs Walliswas to be introduced, and everybody was to be introduced.
Mr Elliot came back accordingly; and on application was forgiven,as you know, and re-admitted into the family; and there it washis constant object, and his only object (till your arrivaladded another motive), to watch Sir Walter and Mrs Clay.
He omitted no opportunity of being with them, threw himself in their way,called at all hours; but I need not be particular on this subject.
You can imagine what an artful man would do; and with this guide,perhaps, may recollect what you have seen him do."
"Yes," said Anne, "you tell me nothing which does not accord withwhat I have known, or could imagine.
There is always something offensivein the details of cunning.
The manoeuvres of selfishness and duplicitymust ever be revolting, but I have heard nothing which really surprises me.
I know those who would be shocked by such a representation of Mr Elliot,who would have difficulty in believing it; but I have never been satisfied.
I have always wanted some other motive for his conduct than appeared.
I should like to know his present opinion, as to the probabilityof the event he has been in dread of; whether he considers the dangerto be lessening or not."
"Lessening, I understand," replied Mrs Smith.
"He thinks Mrs Clayafraid of him, aware that he sees through her, and not daring to proceedas she might do in his absence.
But since he must be absentsome time or other, I do not perceive how he can ever be securewhile she holds her present influence.
Mrs Wallis has an amusing idea,as nurse tells me, that it is to be put into the marriage articleswhen you and Mr Elliot marry, that your father is not to marry Mrs Clay.
A scheme, worthy of Mrs Wallis's understanding, by all accounts;but my sensible nurse Rooke sees the absurdity of it.
`Why, to be sure,ma'am,' said she, `it would not prevent his marrying anybody else.'
And, indeed, to own the truth, I do not think nurse, in her heart,is a very strenuous opposer of Sir Walter's making a second match.
She must be allowed to be a favourer of matrimony, you know;and (since self will intrude) who can say that she may not havesome flying visions of attending the next Lady Elliot, throughMrs Wallis's recommendation?"
"I am very glad to know all this," said Anne, after a littlethoughtfulness.
"It will be more painful to me in some respectsto be in company with him, but I shall know better what to do.
My line of conduct will be more direct.
Mr Elliot is evidentlya disingenuous, artificial, worldly man, who has never hadany better principle to guide him than selfishness."
But Mr Elliot was not done with.
Mrs Smith had been carried awayfrom her first direction, and Anne had forgotten, in the interestof her own family concerns, how much had been originally impliedagainst him; but her attention was now called to the explanationof those first hints, and she listened to a recital which,if it did not perfectly justify the unqualified bitterness of Mrs Smith,proved him to have been very unfeeling in his conduct towards her;very deficient both in justice and compassion.
She learned that (the intimacy between them continuing unimpairedby Mr Elliot's marriage) they had been as before always together,and Mr Elliot had led his friend into expenses much beyond his fortune.
Mrs Smith did not want to take blame to herself, and was most tenderof throwing any on her husband; but Anne could collect that their incomehad never been equal to their style of living, and that from the firstthere had been a great deal of general and joint extravagance.
From his wife's account of him she could discern Mr Smith to have beena man of warm feelings, easy temper, careless habits, and not strongunderstanding, much more amiable than his friend, and very unlike him,led by him, and probably despised by him.
Mr Elliot, raised byhis marriage to great affluence, and disposed to every gratificationof pleasure and vanity which could be commanded without involving himself,(for with all his self-indulgence he had become a prudent man),and beginning to be rich, just as his friend ought to have found himselfto be poor, seemed to have had no concern at all for that friend'sprobable finances, but, on the contrary, had been prompting andencouraging expenses which could end only in ruin; and the Smithsaccordingly had been ruined.
The husband had died just in time to be spared the full knowledge of it.
They had previously known embarrassments enough to try the friendshipof their friends, and to prove that Mr Elliot's had better not be tried;but it was not till his death that the wretched state of his affairswas fully known.
With a confidence in Mr Elliot's regard,more creditable to his feelings than his judgement, Mr Smith hadappointed him the executor of his will; but Mr Elliot would not act,and the difficulties and distress which this refusal had heaped on her,in addition to the inevitable sufferings of her situation, had been suchas could not be related without anguish of spirit, or listened towithout corresponding indignation.
Anne was shewn some letters of his on the occasion, answers tourgent applications from Mrs Smith, which all breathed the samestern resolution of not engaging in a fruitless trouble, and,under a cold civility, the same hard-hearted indifferenceto any of the evils it might bring on her.
It was a dreadful pictureof ingratitude and inhumanity; and Anne felt, at some moments,that no flagrant open crime could have been worse.
She had a great dealto listen to; all the particulars of past sad scenes, all the minutiaeof distress upon distress, which in former conversations had beenmerely hinted at, were dwelt on now with a natural indulgence.
Anne could perfectly comprehend the exquisite relief, and was onlythe more inclined to wonder at the composure of her friend'susual state of mind.
There was one circumstance in the history of her grievancesof particular irritation.
She had good reason to believe thatsome property of her husband in the West Indies, which had beenfor many years under a sort of sequestration for the paymentof its own incumbrances, might be recoverable by proper measures;and this property, though not large, would be enough to makeher comparatively rich.
But there was nobody to stir in it.
Mr Elliot would do nothing, and she could do nothing herself,equally disabled from personal exertion by her state ofbodily weakness, and from employing others by her want of money.
She had no natural connexions to assist her even with their counsel,and she could not afford to purchase the assistance of the law.
This was a cruel aggravation of actually straitened means.
To feel that she ought to be in better circumstances,that a little trouble in the right place might do it,and to fear that delay might be even weakening her claims,was hard to bear.
It was on this point that she had hoped to engage Anne's good officeswith Mr Elliot.
She had previously, in the anticipationof their marriage, been very apprehensive of losing her friend by it;but on being assured that he could have made no attempt of that nature,since he did not even know her to be in Bath, it immediately occurred,that something might be done in her favour by the influence of the womanhe loved, and she had been hastily preparing to interest Anne's feelings,as far as the observances due to Mr Elliot's character would allow,when Anne's refutation of the supposed engagement changedthe face of everything; and while it took from her the new-formed hopeof succeeding in the object of her first anxiety, left her at leastthe comfort of telling the whole story her own way.
After listening to this full description of Mr Elliot, Anne could not butexpress some surprise at Mrs Smith's having spoken of him so favourablyin the beginning of their conversation.
"She had seemed to recommendand praise him!"
"My dear," was Mrs Smith's reply, "there was nothing else to be done.
I considered your marrying him as certain, though he might not yethave made the offer, and I could no more speak the truth of him,than if he had been your husband.
My heart bled for you,as I talked of happiness; and yet he is sensible, he is agreeable,and with such a woman as you, it was not absolutely hopeless.
He was very unkind to his first wife.
They were wretched together.
But she was too ignorant and giddy for respect, and he had never loved her.
I was willing to hope that you must fare better."
Anne could just acknowledge within herself such a possibilityof having been induced to marry him, as made her shudder at the ideaof the misery which must have followed.
It was just possible thatshe might have been persuaded by Lady Russell!
And under sucha supposition, which would have been most miserable, when time haddisclosed all, too late?
It was very desirable that Lady Russell should be no longer deceived;and one of the concluding arrangements of this important conference,which carried them through the greater part of the morning,was, that Anne had full liberty to communicate to her friendeverything relative to Mrs Smith, in which his conduct was involved.
Chapter 22Anne went home to think over all that she had heard.
In one point,her feelings were relieved by this knowledge of Mr Elliot.
There was no longer anything of tenderness due to him.
He stood asopposed to Captain Wentworth, in all his own unwelcome obtrusiveness;and the evil of his attentions last night, the irremediable mischiefhe might have done, was considered with sensations unqualified, unperplexed.
Pity for him was all over.
But this was the only point of relief.
In every other respect, in looking around her, or penetrating forward,she saw more to distrust and to apprehend.
She was concernedfor the disappointment and pain Lady Russell would be feeling;for the mortifications which must be hanging over her father and sister,and had all the distress of foreseeing many evils, without knowinghow to avert any one of them.
She was most thankful for her ownknowledge of him.
She had never considered herself as entitled to rewardfor not slighting an old friend like Mrs Smith, but here wasa reward indeed springing from it!
Mrs Smith had been able to tell herwhat no one else could have done.
Could the knowledge havebeen extended through her family?
But this was a vain idea.
She must talk to Lady Russell, tell her, consult with her,and having done her best, wait the event with as much composureas possible; and after all, her greatest want of composure would bein that quarter of the mind which could not be opened to Lady Russell;in that flow of anxieties and fears which must be all to herself.
She found, on reaching home, that she had, as she intended,escaped seeing Mr Elliot; that he had called and paid thema long morning visit; but hardly had she congratulated herself,and felt safe, when she heard that he was coming again in the evening.
"I had not the smallest intention of asking him," said Elizabeth,with affected carelessness, "but he gave so many hints;so Mrs Clay says, at least."
"Indeed, I do say it.
I never saw anybody in my life spell harderfor an invitation.
Poor man!
I was really in pain for him;for your hard-hearted sister, Miss Anne, seems bent on cruelty."
"Oh!"
cried Elizabeth, "I have been rather too much used to the gameto be soon overcome by a gentleman's hints.
However, when I foundhow excessively he was regretting that he should miss my fatherthis morning, I gave way immediately, for I would never really omitan opportunity of bring him and Sir Walter together.
They appear toso much advantage in company with each other.
Each behaving so pleasantly.
Mr Elliot looking up with so much respect."
"Quite delightful!"
cried Mrs Clay, not daring, however,to turn her eyes towards Anne.
"Exactly like father and son!
Dear Miss Elliot, may I not say father and son?"
"Oh!
I lay no embargo on any body's words.
If you will have suchideas!
But, upon my word, I am scarcely sensible of his attentionsbeing beyond those of other men."
"My dear Miss Elliot!"
exclaimed Mrs Clay, lifting her hands and eyes,and sinking all the rest of her astonishment in a convenient silence.
"Well, my dear Penelope, you need not be so alarmed about him.
I did invite him, you know.
I sent him away with smiles.
When I found he was really going to his friends at Thornberry Parkfor the whole day to-morrow, I had compassion on him."
Anne admired the good acting of the friend, in being able to shewsuch pleasure as she did, in the expectation and in the actual arrivalof the very person whose presence must really be interfering withher prime object.
It was impossible but that Mrs Clay must hatethe sight of Mr Elliot; and yet she could assume a most obliging,placid look, and appear quite satisfied with the curtailed licenseof devoting herself only half as much to Sir Walter as she would havedone otherwise.
To Anne herself it was most distressing to see Mr Elliot enter the room;and quite painful to have him approach and speak to her.
She had been used before to feel that he could not be always quite sincere,but now she saw insincerity in everything.
His attentive deferenceto her father, contrasted with his former language, was odious;and when she thought of his cruel conduct towards Mrs Smith,she could hardly bear the sight of his present smiles and mildness,or the sound of his artificial good sentiments.
She meant to avoid any such alteration of manners as might provokea remonstrance on his side.
It was a great object to her to escapeall enquiry or eclat; but it was her intention to be as decidedly coolto him as might be compatible with their relationship; and to retrace,as quietly as she could, the few steps of unnecessary intimacy she hadbeen gradually led along.
She was accordingly more guarded,and more cool, than she had been the night before.
He wanted to animate her curiosity again as to how and wherehe could have heard her formerly praised; wanted very muchto be gratified by more solicitation; but the charm was broken:he found that the heat and animation of a public room was necessaryto kindle his modest cousin's vanity; he found, at least, that it wasnot to be done now, by any of those attempts which he could hazardamong the too-commanding claims of the others.
He little surmisedthat it was a subject acting now exactly against his interest,bringing immediately to her thoughts all those parts of his conductwhich were least excusable.
She had some satisfaction in finding that he was really going out of Baththe next morning, going early, and that he would be gone the greater partof two days.
He was invited again to Camden Place the very evening ofhis return; but from Thursday to Saturday evening his absence was certain.
It was bad enough that a Mrs Clay should be always before her;but that a deeper hypocrite should be added to their party,seemed the destruction of everything like peace and comfort.
It was so humiliating to reflect on the constant deception practisedon her father and Elizabeth; to consider the various sourcesof mortification preparing for them!
Mrs Clay's selfishness wasnot so complicate nor so revolting as his; and Anne would have compoundedfor the marriage at once, with all its evils, to be clear of Mr Elliot'ssubtleties in endeavouring to prevent it.
On Friday morning she meant to go very early to Lady Russell,and accomplish the necessary communication; and she would have gonedirectly after breakfast, but that Mrs Clay was also going outon some obliging purpose of saving her sister trouble, whichdetermined her to wait till she might be safe from such a companion.
She saw Mrs Clay fairly off, therefore, before she began to talkof spending the morning in Rivers Street.
"Very well," said Elizabeth, "I have nothing to send but my love.
Oh!
you may as well take back that tiresome book she would lend me,and pretend I have read it through.
I really cannot be plaguing myselffor ever with all the new poems and states of the nation that come out.
Lady Russell quite bores one with her new publications.
You need not tell her so, but I thought her dress hideous the other night.
I used to think she had some taste in dress, but I was ashamed of herat the concert.
Something so formal and arrange in her air!
and she sits so upright!
My best love, of course."
"And mine," added Sir Walter.
"Kindest regards.
And you may say,that I mean to call upon her soon.
Make a civil message;but I shall only leave my card.
Morning visits are never fairby women at her time of life, who make themselves up so little.
If she would only wear rouge she would not be afraid of being seen;but last time I called, I observed the blinds were let down immediately."
While her father spoke, there was a knock at the door.
Who could it be?
Anne, remembering the preconcerted visits, at all hours, of Mr Elliot,would have expected him, but for his known engagement seven miles off.
After the usual period of suspense, the usual sounds of approach were heard,and "Mr and Mrs Charles Musgrove" were ushered into the room.
Surprise was the strongest emotion raised by their appearance;but Anne was really glad to see them; and the others were not so sorrybut that they could put on a decent air of welcome; and as soonas it became clear that these, their nearest relations, were not arrivedwith an views of accommodation in that house, Sir Walter and Elizabethwere able to rise in cordiality, and do the honours of it very well.
They were come to Bath for a few days with Mrs Musgrove, and wereat the White Hart.
So much was pretty soon understood;but till Sir Walter and Elizabeth were walking Mary intothe other drawing-room, and regaling themselves with her admiration,Anne could not draw upon Charles's brain for a regular historyof their coming, or an explanation of some smiling hintsof particular business, which had been ostentatiously dropped by Mary,as well as of some apparent confusion as to whom their party consisted of.
She then found that it consisted of Mrs Musgrove, Henrietta,and Captain Harville, beside their two selves.
He gave her a very plain,intelligible account of the whole; a narration in which she sawa great deal of most characteristic proceeding.
The schemehad received its first impulse by Captain Harville's wanting tocome to Bath on business.
He had begun to talk of it a week ago;and by way of doing something, as shooting was over, Charles had proposedcoming with him, and Mrs Harville had seemed to like the idea of itvery much, as an advantage to her husband; but Mary could not bearto be left, and had made herself so unhappy about it, that for a day or twoeverything seemed to be in suspense, or at an end.
But then,it had been taken up by his father and mother.
His mother hadsome old friends in Bath whom she wanted to see; it was thoughta good opportunity for Henrietta to come and buy wedding-clothesfor herself and her sister; and, in short, it ended in beinghis mother's party, that everything might be comfortable and easyto Captain Harville; and he and Mary were included in itby way of general convenience.
They had arrived late the night before.
Mrs Harville, her children, and Captain Benwick, remained withMr Musgrove and Louisa at Uppercross.
Anne's only surprise was, that affairs should be in forwardness enoughfor Henrietta's wedding-clothes to be talked of.
She had imaginedsuch difficulties of fortune to exist there as must preventthe marriage from being near at hand; but she learned from Charles that,very recently, (since Mary's last letter to herself), Charles Hayterhad been applied to by a friend to hold a living for a youthwho could not possibly claim it under many years; and thaton the strength of his present income, with almost a certaintyof something more permanent long before the term in question,the two families had consented to the young people's wishes,and that their marriage was likely to take place in a few months,quite as soon as Louisa's.
"And a very good living it was,"Charles added:  "only five-and-twenty miles from Uppercross,and in a very fine country:   fine part of Dorsetshire.
In the centre of some of the best preserves in the kingdom,surrounded by three great proprietors, each more careful and jealousthan the other; and to two of the three at least, Charles Hayter might geta special recommendation.
Not that he will value it as he ought,"he observed, "Charles is too cool about sporting.
That's the worst of him."
"I am extremely glad, indeed," cried Anne, "particularly gladthat this should happen; and that of two sisters, who both deserveequally well, and who have always been such good friends,the pleasant prospect of one should not be dimming those of the other--that they should be so equal in their prosperity and comfort.
I hope your father and mother are quite happy with regard to both."
"Oh!
yes.
My father would be well pleased if the gentlemen were richer,but he has no other fault to find.
Money, you know, coming down withmoney--two daughters at once--it cannot be a very agreeable operation,and it streightens him as to many things.
However, I do not mean to saythey have not a right to it.
It is very fit they should havedaughters' shares; and I am sure he has always been a very kind,liberal father to me.
Mary does not above half like Henrietta's match.
She never did, you know.
But she does not do him justice,nor think enough about Winthrop.
I cannot make her attend tothe value of the property.
It is a very fair match, as times go;and I have liked Charles Hayter all my life, and I shall not leave off now."
"Such excellent parents as Mr and Mrs Musgrove," exclaimed Anne,"should be happy in their children's marriages.
They do everythingto confer happiness, I am sure.
What a blessing to young peopleto be in such hands!
Your father and mother seem so totally freefrom all those ambitious feelings which have led to so much misconductand misery, both in young and old.
I hope you think Louisaperfectly recovered now?"
He answered rather hesitatingly, "Yes, I believe I do; very much recovered;but she is altered; there is no running or jumping about, no laughingor dancing; it is quite different.
If one happens only to shut the doora little hard, she starts and wriggles like a young dab-chick in the water;and Benwick sits at her elbow, reading verses, or whispering to her,all day long."
Anne could not help laughing.
"That cannot be much to your taste,I know," said she; "but I do believe him to be an excellent young man."
"To be sure he is.
Nobody doubts it; and I hope you do not thinkI am so illiberal as to want every man to have the same objects andpleasures as myself.
I have a great value for Benwick; and when one canbut get him to talk, he has plenty to say.
His reading has done himno harm, for he has fought as well as read.
He is a brave fellow.
I got more acquainted with him last Monday than ever I did before.
We had a famous set-to at rat-hunting all the morning inmy father's great barns; and he played his part so wellthat I have liked him the better ever since."
Here they were interrupted by the absolute necessity of Charles'sfollowing the others to admire mirrors and china; but Anne hadheard enough to understand the present state of Uppercross,and rejoice in its happiness; and though she sighed as she rejoiced,her sigh had none of the ill-will of envy in it.
She would certainlyhave risen to their blessings if she could, but she did not wantto lessen theirs.
The visit passed off altogether in high good humour.
Mary wasin excellent spirits, enjoying the gaiety and the change,and so well satisfied with the journey in her mother-in-law's carriagewith four horses, and with her own complete independence of Camden Place,that she was exactly in a temper to admire everything as she ought,and enter most readily into all the superiorities of the house,as they were detailed to her.
She had no demands on her father or sister,and her consequence was just enough increased by their handsomedrawing-rooms.
Elizabeth was, for a short time, suffering a good deal.
She felt that Mrs Musgrove and all her party ought to be askedto dine with them; but she could not bear to have the difference of style,the reduction of servants, which a dinner must betray, witnessed by thosewho had been always so inferior to the Elliots of Kellynch.
It was a struggle between propriety and vanity; but vanity got the better,and then Elizabeth was happy again.
These were her internal persuasions:"Old fashioned notions; country hospitality; we do not professto give dinners; few people in Bath do; Lady Alicia never does;did not even ask her own sister's family, though they were here a month:and I dare say it would be very inconvenient to Mrs Musgrove;put her quite out of her way.
I am sure she would rather not come;she cannot feel easy with us.
I will ask them all for an evening;that will be much better; that will be a novelty and a treat.
They have not seen two such drawing rooms before.
They will be delightedto come to-morrow evening.
It shall be a regular party, small,but most elegant."
And this satisfied Elizabeth:  and when the invitationwas given to the two present, and promised for the absent,Mary was as completely satisfied.
She was particularly askedto meet Mr Elliot, and be introduced to Lady Dalrymple and Miss Carteret,who were fortunately already engaged to come; and she could nothave received a more gratifying attention.
Miss Elliot was to havethe honour of calling on Mrs Musgrove in the course of the morning;and Anne walked off with Charles and Mary, to go and see herand Henrietta directly.
Her plan of sitting with Lady Russell must give way for the present.
They all three called in Rivers Street for a couple of minutes;but Anne convinced herself that a day's delay of the intended communicationcould be of no consequence, and hastened forward to the White Hart,to see again the friends and companions of the last autumn,with an eagerness of good-will which many associations contributed to form.
They found Mrs Musgrove and her daughter within, and by themselves,and Anne had the kindest welcome from each.
Henrietta was exactlyin that state of recently-improved views, of fresh-formed happiness,which made her full of regard and interest for everybody she hadever liked before at all; and Mrs Musgrove's real affection had been wonby her usefulness when they were in distress.
It was a heartiness,and a warmth, and a sincerity which Anne delighted in the more,from the sad want of such blessings at home.
She was entreatedto give them as much of her time as possible, invited for every dayand all day long, or rather claimed as part of the family; and, in return,she naturally fell into all her wonted ways of attention and assistance,and on Charles's leaving them together, was listening to Mrs Musgrove'shistory of Louisa, and to Henrietta's of herself, giving opinionson business, and recommendations to shops; with intervals of every helpwhich Mary required, from altering her ribbon to settling her accounts;from finding her keys, and assorting her trinkets, to tryingto convince her that she was not ill-used by anybody; which Mary,well amused as she generally was, in her station at a windowoverlooking the entrance to the Pump Room, could not but haveher moments of imagining.
A morning of thorough confusion was to be expected.
A large partyin an hotel ensured a quick-changing, unsettled scene.
One five minutesbrought a note, the next a parcel; and Anne had not been therehalf an hour, when their dining-room, spacious as it was,seemed more than half filled:  a party of steady old friendswere seated around Mrs Musgrove, and Charles came back withCaptains Harville and Wentworth.
The appearance of the lattercould not be more than the surprise of the moment.
It was impossiblefor her to have forgotten to feel that this arrival of theircommon friends must be soon bringing them together again.
Their last meeting had been most important in opening his feelings;she had derived from it a delightful conviction; but she fearedfrom his looks, that the same unfortunate persuasion, which hadhastened him away from the Concert Room, still governed.
He did not seem to want to be near enough for conversation.
She tried to be calm, and leave things to take their course,and tried to dwell much on this argument of rational dependence:--"Surely, if there be constant attachment on each side, our heartsmust understand each other ere long.
We are not boy and girl,to be captiously irritable, misled by every moment's inadvertence,and wantonly playing with our own happiness."
And yet,a few minutes afterwards, she felt as if their being in companywith each other, under their present circumstances, could only beexposing them to inadvertencies and misconstructions of the mostmischievous kind.
"Anne," cried Mary, still at her window, "there is Mrs Clay,I am sure, standing under the colonnade, and a gentleman with her.
I saw them turn the corner from Bath Street just now.
They seemeddeep in talk.
Who is it?
Come, and tell me.
Good heavens!
I recollect.
It is Mr Elliot himself."
"No," cried Anne, quickly, "it cannot be Mr Elliot, I assure you.
He was to leave Bath at nine this morning, and does not come backtill to-morrow."
As she spoke, she felt that Captain Wentworth was looking at her,the consciousness of which vexed and embarrassed her, and made her regretthat she had said so much, simple as it was.
Mary, resenting that she should be supposed not to know her own cousin,began talking very warmly about the family features, and protestingstill more positively that it was Mr Elliot, calling again upon Anneto come and look for herself, but Anne did not mean to stir,and tried to be cool and unconcerned.
Her distress returned,however, on perceiving smiles and intelligent glances pass betweentwo or three of the lady visitors, as if they believed themselvesquite in the secret.
It was evident that the report concerning herhad spread, and a short pause succeeded, which seemed to ensurethat it would now spread farther.
"Do come, Anne" cried Mary, "come and look yourself.
You will be too lateif you do not make haste.
They are parting; they are shaking hands.
He is turning away.
Not know Mr Elliot, indeed!
You seem to haveforgot all about Lyme."
To pacify Mary, and perhaps screen her own embarrassment,Anne did move quietly to the window.
She was just in time to ascertainthat it really was Mr Elliot, which she had never believed,before he disappeared on one side, as Mrs Clay walked quickly offon the other; and checking the surprise which she could not but feelat such an appearance of friendly conference between two personsof totally opposite interest, she calmly said, "Yes, it is Mr Elliot,certainly.
He has changed his hour of going, I suppose, that is all,or I may be mistaken, I might not attend;" and walked back to her chair,recomposed, and with the comfortable hope of having acquitted herself well.
The visitors took their leave; and Charles, having civilly seen them off,and then made a face at them, and abused them for coming, began with--"Well, mother, I have done something for you that you will like.
I have been to the theatre, and secured a box for to-morrow night.
A'n't I a good boy?
I know you love a play; and there is room for us all.
It holds nine.
I have engaged Captain Wentworth.
Anne willnot be sorry to join us, I am sure.
We all like a play.
Have not I done well, mother?"
Mrs Musgrove was good humouredly beginning to express her perfect readinessfor the play, if Henrietta and all the others liked it, when Maryeagerly interrupted her by exclaiming--"Good heavens, Charles!
how can you think of such a thing?
Take a box for to-morrow night!
Have you forgot that we are engagedto Camden Place to-morrow night?
and that we were most particularly askedto meet Lady Dalrymple and her daughter, and Mr Elliot, and allthe principal family connexions, on purpose to be introduced to them?
How can you be so forgetful?"
"Phoo!
phoo!"
replied Charles, "what's an evening party?
Never worth remembering.
Your father might have asked us to dinner,I think, if he had wanted to see us.
You may do as you like,but I shall go to the play."
"Oh!
Charles, I declare it will be too abominable if you do,when you promised to go."
"No, I did not promise.
I only smirked and bowed, and said the word`happy.'
There was no promise."
"But you must go, Charles.
It would be unpardonable to fail.
We were asked on purpose to be introduced.
There was alwayssuch a great connexion between the Dalrymples and ourselves.
Nothing ever happened on either side that was not announced immediately.
We are quite near relations, you know; and Mr Elliot too,whom you ought so particularly to be acquainted with!
Every attentionis due to Mr Elliot.
Consider, my father's heir:  the futurerepresentative of the family."
"Don't talk to me about heirs and representatives," cried Charles.
"I am not one of those who neglect the reigning power to bowto the rising sun.
If I would not go for the sake of your father,I should think it scandalous to go for the sake of his heir.
What is Mr Elliot to me?"
The careless expression was life to Anne,who saw that Captain Wentworth was all attention, looking andlistening with his whole soul; and that the last words broughthis enquiring eyes from Charles to herself.
Charles and Mary still talked on in the same style; he, half seriousand half jesting, maintaining the scheme for the play, and she,invariably serious, most warmly opposing it, and not omittingto make it known that, however determined to go to Camden Place herself,she should not think herself very well used, if they went to the playwithout her.
Mrs Musgrove interposed.
"We had better put it off.
Charles, you had much better go backand change the box for Tuesday.
It would be a pity to be divided,and we should be losing Miss Anne, too, if there is a party at her father's;and I am sure neither Henrietta nor I should care at all for the play,if Miss Anne could not be with us."
Anne felt truly obliged to her for such kindness; and quite as muchso for the opportunity it gave her of decidedly saying--"If it depended only on my inclination, ma'am, the party at home(excepting on Mary's account) would not be the smallest impediment.
I have no pleasure in the sort of meeting, and should be too happyto change it for a play, and with you.
But, it had betternot be attempted, perhaps."
She had spoken it; but she trembledwhen it was done, conscious that her words were listened to,and daring not even to try to observe their effect.
It was soon generally agreed that Tuesday should be the day;Charles only reserving the advantage of still teasing his wife,by persisting that he would go to the play to-morrow if nobody else would.
Captain Wentworth left his seat, and walked to the fire-place;probably for the sake of walking away from it soon afterwards,and taking a station, with less bare-faced design, by Anne.
"You have not been long enough in Bath," said he, "to enjoythe evening parties of the place."
"Oh!
no.
The usual character of them has nothing for me.
I am no card-player."
"You were not formerly, I know.
You did not use to like cards;but time makes many changes."
"I am not yet so much changed," cried Anne, and stopped, fearing shehardly knew what misconstruction.
After waiting a few momentshe said, and as if it were the result of immediate feeling,"It is a period, indeed!
Eight years and a half is a period."
Whether he would have proceeded farther was left to Anne's imaginationto ponder over in a calmer hour; for while still hearing the soundshe had uttered, she was startled to other subjects by Henrietta,eager to make use of the present leisure for getting out,and calling on her companions to lose no time, lest somebody elseshould come in.
They were obliged to move.
Anne talked of being perfectly ready,and tried to look it; but she felt that could Henrietta have knownthe regret and reluctance of her heart in quitting that chair,in preparing to quit the room, she would have found, in all her ownsensations for her cousin, in the very security of his affection,wherewith to pity her.
Their preparations, however, were stopped short.
Alarming soundswere heard; other visitors approached, and the door was thrown openfor Sir Walter and Miss Elliot, whose entrance seemed to givea general chill.
Anne felt an instant oppression, and wherever she lookedsaw symptoms of the same.
The comfort, the freedom, the gaietyof the room was over, hushed into cold composure, determined silence,or insipid talk, to meet the heartless elegance of her father and sister.
How mortifying to feel that it was so!
Her jealous eye was satisfied in one particular.
Captain Wentworthwas acknowledged again by each, by Elizabeth more graciously than before.
She even addressed him once, and looked at him more than once.
Elizabeth was, in fact, revolving a great measure.
The sequelexplained it.
After the waste of a few minutes in sayingthe proper nothings, she began to give the invitation whichwas to comprise all the remaining dues of the Musgroves.
"To-morrow evening, to meet a few friends:  no formal party."
It was all said very gracefully, and the cards with which she hadprovided herself, the "Miss Elliot at home," were laid on the table,with a courteous, comprehensive smile to all, and one smile andone card more decidedly for Captain Wentworth.
The truth was,that Elizabeth had been long enough in Bath to understandthe importance of a man of such an air and appearance as his.
The past was nothing.
The present was that Captain Wentworthwould move about well in her drawing-room.
The card was pointedly given,and Sir Walter and Elizabeth arose and disappeared.
The interruption had been short, though severe, and ease and animationreturned to most of those they left as the door shut them out,but not to Anne.
She could think only of the invitation she hadwith such astonishment witnessed, and of the manner in whichit had been received; a manner of doubtful meaning, of surprise ratherthan gratification, of polite acknowledgement rather than acceptance.
She knew him; she saw disdain in his eye, and could not venture to believethat he had determined to accept such an offering, as an atonementfor all the insolence of the past.
Her spirits sank.
He held the cardin his hand after they were gone, as if deeply considering it.
"Only think of Elizabeth's including everybody!"
whispered Maryvery audibly.
"I do not wonder Captain Wentworth is delighted!
You see he cannot put the card out of his hand."
Anne caught his eye, saw his cheeks glow, and his mouth form itselfinto a momentary expression of contempt, and turned away,that she might neither see nor hear more to vex her.
The party separated.
The gentlemen had their own pursuits,the ladies proceeded on their own business, and they met no more whileAnne belonged to them.
She was earnestly begged to return and dine,and give them all the rest of the day, but her spirits had beenso long exerted that at present she felt unequal to more,and fit only for home, where she might be sure of being as silentas she chose.
Promising to be with them the whole of the following morning, therefore,she closed the fatigues of the present by a toilsome walk to Camden Place,there to spend the evening chiefly in listening to the busy arrangementsof Elizabeth and Mrs Clay for the morrow's party, the frequent enumerationof the persons invited, and the continually improving detail of allthe embellishments which were to make it the most completely elegantof its kind in Bath, while harassing herself with the never-endingquestion, of whether Captain Wentworth would come or not?
They werereckoning him as certain, but with her it was a gnawing solicitudenever appeased for five minutes together.
She generally thoughthe would come, because she generally thought he ought; but it was a casewhich she could not so shape into any positive act of duty or discretion,as inevitably to defy the suggestions of very opposite feelings.
She only roused herself from the broodings of this restless agitation,to let Mrs Clay know that she had been seen with Mr Elliotthree hours after his being supposed to be out of Bath,for having watched in vain for some intimation of the interviewfrom the lady herself, she determined to mention it, and it seemed to herthere was guilt in Mrs Clay's face as she listened.
It was transient:cleared away in an instant; but Anne could imagine she read therethe consciousness of having, by some complication of mutual trick,or some overbearing authority of his, been obliged to attend(perhaps for half an hour) to his lectures and restrictions on her designson Sir Walter.
She exclaimed, however, with a very tolerableimitation of nature: --"Oh!
dear!
very true.
Only think, Miss Elliot, to my great surpriseI met with Mr Elliot in Bath Street.
I was never more astonished.
He turned back and walked with me to the Pump Yard.
He had been preventedsetting off for Thornberry, but I really forget by what;for I was in a hurry, and could not much attend, and I can only answerfor his being determined not to be delayed in his return.
He wanted to know how early he might be admitted to-morrow.
He was full of `to-morrow,' and it is very evident that I have beenfull of it too, ever since I entered the house, and learnt the extensionof your plan and all that had happened, or my seeing him could never havegone so entirely out of my head."
Chapter 23One day only had passed since Anne's conversation with Mrs Smith;but a keener interest had succeeded, and she was now so little touchedby Mr Elliot's conduct, except by its effects in one quarter,that it became a matter of course the next morning, still to deferher explanatory visit in Rivers Street.
She had promised to bewith the Musgroves from breakfast to dinner.
Her faith was plighted,and Mr Elliot's character, like the Sultaness Scheherazade's head,must live another day.
She could not keep her appointment punctually, however;the weather was unfavourable, and she had grieved over the rainon her friends' account, and felt it very much on her own,before she was able to attempt the walk.
When she reached the White Hart,and made her way to the proper apartment, she found herselfneither arriving quite in time, nor the first to arrive.
The party before her were, Mrs Musgrove, talking to Mrs Croft,and Captain Harville to Captain Wentworth; and she immediately heardthat Mary and Henrietta, too impatient to wait, had gone out the momentit had cleared, but would be back again soon, and that the strictestinjunctions had been left with Mrs Musgrove to keep her theretill they returned.
She had only to submit, sit down,be outwardly composed, and feel herself plunged at oncein all the agitations which she had merely laid her account oftasting a little before the morning closed.
There was no delay,no waste of time.
She was deep in the happiness of such misery,or the misery of such happiness, instantly.
Two minutes afterher entering the room, Captain Wentworth said--"We will write the letter we were talking of, Harville, now,if you will give me materials."
Materials were at hand, on a separate table; he went to it,and nearly turning his back to them all, was engrossed by writing.
Mrs Musgrove was giving Mrs Croft the history of her eldestdaughter's engagement, and just in that inconvenient tone of voicewhich was perfectly audible while it pretended to be a whisper.
Anne felt that she did not belong to the conversation, and yet,as Captain Harville seemed thoughtful and not disposed to talk,she could not avoid hearing many undesirable particulars; such as,"how Mr Musgrove and my brother Hayter had met again and againto talk it over; what my brother Hayter had said one day,and what Mr Musgrove had proposed the next, and what had occurredto my sister Hayter, and what the young people had wished, and whatI said at first I never could consent to, but was afterwards persuadedto think might do very well," and a great deal in the same styleof open-hearted communication:  minutiae which, even with every advantageof taste and delicacy, which good Mrs Musgrove could not give,could be properly interesting only to the principals.
Mrs Croftwas attending with great good-humour, and whenever she spoke at all,it was very sensibly.
Anne hoped the gentlemen might each betoo much self-occupied to hear.
"And so, ma'am, all these thing considered," said Mrs Musgrove,in her powerful whisper, "though we could have wished it different,yet, altogether, we did not think it fair to stand out any longer,for Charles Hayter was quite wild about it, and Henrietta waspretty near as bad; and so we thought they had better marry at once,and make the best of it, as many others have done before them.
At any rate, said I, it will be better than a long engagement."
"That is precisely what I was going to observe," cried Mrs Croft.
"I would rather have young people settle on a small income at once,and have to struggle with a few difficulties together, than beinvolved in a long engagement.
I always think that no mutual--""Oh!
dear Mrs Croft," cried Mrs Musgrove, unable to let herfinish her speech, "there is nothing I so abominate for young peopleas a long engagement.
It is what I always protested againstfor my children.
It is all very well, I used to say, for young peopleto be engaged, if there is a certainty of their being able to marryin six months, or even in twelve; but a long engagement--""Yes, dear ma'am," said Mrs Croft, "or an uncertain engagement,an engagement which may be long.
To begin without knowingthat at such a time there will be the means of marrying,I hold to be very unsafe and unwise, and what I think all parentsshould prevent as far as they can."
Anne found an unexpected interest here.
She felt its applicationto herself, felt it in a nervous thrill all over her; and at the samemoment that her eyes instinctively glanced towards the distant table,Captain Wentworth's pen ceased to move, his head was raised, pausing,listening, and he turned round the next instant to give a look,one quick, conscious look at her.
The two ladies continued to talk, to re-urge the same admitted truths,and enforce them with such examples of the ill effect ofa contrary practice as had fallen within their observation,but Anne heard nothing distinctly; it was only a buzz of words in her ear,her mind was in confusion.
Captain Harville, who had in truth been hearing none of it,now left his seat, and moved to a window, and Anne seeming to watch him,though it was from thorough absence of mind, became gradually sensiblethat he was inviting her to join him where he stood.
He looked at herwith a smile, and a little motion of the head, which expressed,"Come to me, I have something to say;" and the unaffected,easy kindness of manner which denoted the feelings of an older acquaintancethan he really was, strongly enforced the invitation.
She roused herselfand went to him.
The window at which he stood was at the other endof the room from where the two ladies were sitting, and though nearerto Captain Wentworth's table, not very near.
As she joined him,Captain Harville's countenance re-assumed the serious, thoughtfulexpression which seemed its natural character.
"Look here," said he, unfolding a parcel in his hand, and displayinga small miniature painting, "do you know who that is?"
"Certainly:  Captain Benwick."
"Yes, and you may guess who it is for.
But," (in a deep tone,)"it was not done for her.
Miss Elliot, do you remember ourwalking together at Lyme, and grieving for him?
I little thought then--but no matter.
This was drawn at the Cape.
He met witha clever young German artist at the Cape, and in compliance with a promiseto my poor sister, sat to him, and was bringing it home for her;and I have now the charge of getting it properly set for another!
It was a commission to me!
But who else was there to employ?
I hope I can allow for him.
I am not sorry, indeed, to make itover to another.
He undertakes it;" (looking towards Captain Wentworth,)"he is writing about it now."
And with a quivering lip he wound upthe whole by adding, "Poor Fanny!
she would not have forgotten him so soon!"
"No," replied Anne, in a low, feeling voice.
"That I can easily believe."
"It was not in her nature.
She doted on him."
"It would not be the nature of any woman who truly loved."
Captain Harville smiled, as much as to say, "Do you claim thatfor your sex?"
and she answered the question, smiling also,"Yes.
We certainly do not forget you as soon as you forget us.
It is, perhaps, our fate rather than our merit.
We cannot help ourselves.
We live at home, quiet, confined, and our feelings prey upon us.
You are forced on exertion.
You have always a profession, pursuits,business of some sort or other, to take you back into the world immediately,and continual occupation and change soon weaken impressions."
"Granting your assertion that the world does all this so soon for men(which, however, I do not think I shall grant), it does not applyto Benwick.
He has not been forced upon any exertion.
The peaceturned him on shore at the very moment, and he has been living with us,in our little family circle, ever since."
"True," said Anne, "very true; I did not recollect; but what shallwe say now, Captain Harville?
If the change be not fromoutward circumstances, it must be from within; it must be nature,man's nature, which has done the business for Captain Benwick."
"No, no, it is not man's nature.
I will not allow it to be moreman's nature than woman's to be inconstant and forget those they do love,or have loved.
I believe the reverse.
I believe in a true analogybetween our bodily frames and our mental; and that as our bodies arethe strongest, so are our feelings; capable of bearing most rough usage,and riding out the heaviest weather."
"Your feelings may be the strongest," replied Anne, "but the same spiritof analogy will authorise me to assert that ours are the most tender.
Man is more robust than woman, but he is not longer lived;which exactly explains my view of the nature of their attachments.
Nay, it would be too hard upon you, if it were otherwise.
You have difficulties, and privations, and dangers enough to struggle with.
You are always labouring and toiling, exposed to every risk and hardship.
Your home, country, friends, all quitted.
Neither time, nor health,nor life, to be called your own.
It would be hard, indeed"(with a faltering voice), "if woman's feelings were to beadded to all this."
"We shall never agree upon this question," Captain Harvillewas beginning to say, when a slight noise called their attentionto Captain Wentworth's hitherto perfectly quiet division of the room.
It was nothing more than that his pen had fallen down; but Anne wasstartled at finding him nearer than she had supposed, and half inclinedto suspect that the pen had only fallen because he had beenoccupied by them, striving to catch sounds, which yet she did not thinkhe could have caught.
"Have you finished your letter?"
said Captain Harville.
"Not quite, a few lines more.
I shall have done in five minutes."
"There is no hurry on my side.
I am only ready whenever you are.
I am in very good anchorage here," (smiling at Anne,) "well supplied,and want for nothing.
No hurry for a signal at all.
Well, Miss Elliot,"(lowering his voice,) "as I was saying we shall never agree,I suppose, upon this point.
No man and woman, would, probably.
But let me observe that all histories are against you--all stories,prose and verse.
If I had such a memory as Benwick, I could bring youfifty quotations in a moment on my side the argument, and I do not thinkI ever opened a book in my life which had not something to sayupon woman's inconstancy.
Songs and proverbs, all talkof woman's fickleness.
But perhaps you will say, these were allwritten by men."
"Perhaps I shall.
Yes, yes, if you please, no reference to examplesin books.
Men have had every advantage of us in telling their own story.
Education has been theirs in so much higher a degree; the pen hasbeen in their hands.
I will not allow books to prove anything."
"But how shall we prove anything?"
"We never shall.
We never can expect to prove any thing upon such a point.
It is a difference of opinion which does not admit of proof.
We each begin, probably, with a little bias towards our own sex;and upon that bias build every circumstance in favour of itwhich has occurred within our own circle; many of which circumstances(perhaps those very cases which strike us the most) may be precisely suchas cannot be brought forward without betraying a confidence,or in some respect saying what should not be said."
"Ah!"
cried Captain Harville, in a tone of strong feeling,"if I could but make you comprehend what a man suffers when he takesa last look at his wife and children, and watches the boatthat he has sent them off in, as long as it is in sight,and then turns away and says, `God knows whether we ever meet again!'
And then, if I could convey to you the glow of his soul when he doessee them again; when, coming back after a twelvemonth's absence,perhaps, and obliged to put into another port, he calculates how soonit be possible to get them there, pretending to deceive himself,and saying, `They cannot be here till such a day,' but all the whilehoping for them twelve hours sooner, and seeing them arrive at last,as if Heaven had given them wings, by many hours sooner still!
If I could explain to you all this, and all that a man can bear and do,and glories to do, for the sake of these treasures of his existence!
I speak, you know, only of such men as have hearts!"
pressing his ownwith emotion.
"Oh!"
cried Anne eagerly, "I hope I do justice to all that is felt by you,and by those who resemble you.
God forbid that I should undervaluethe warm and faithful feelings of any of my fellow-creatures!
I should deserve utter contempt if I dared to suppose that true attachmentand constancy were known only by woman.
No, I believe you capableof everything great and good in your married lives.
I believe you equalto every important exertion, and to every domestic forbearance,so long as--if I may be allowed the expression--so long as you havean object.
I mean while the woman you love lives, and lives for you.
All the privilege I claim for my own sex (it is not a very enviable one;you need not covet it), is that of loving longest, when existenceor when hope is gone."
She could not immediately have uttered another sentence; her heartwas too full, her breath too much oppressed.
"You are a good soul," cried Captain Harville, putting his handon her arm, quite affectionately.
"There is no quarrelling with you.
And when I think of Benwick, my tongue is tied."
Their attention was called towards the others.
Mrs Croft was taking leave.
"Here, Frederick, you and I part company, I believe," said she.
"I am going home, and you have an engagement with your friend.
To-night we may have the pleasure of all meeting again at your party,"(turning to Anne.)
"We had your sister's card yesterday,and I understood Frederick had a card too, though I did not see it;and you are disengaged, Frederick, are you not, as well as ourselves?"
Captain Wentworth was folding up a letter in great haste, and eithercould not or would not answer fully.
"Yes," said he, "very true; here we separate, but Harville and Ishall soon be after you; that is, Harville, if you are ready,I am in half a minute.
I know you will not be sorry to be off.
I shall be at your service in half a minute."
Mrs Croft left them, and Captain Wentworth, having sealed his letterwith great rapidity, was indeed ready, and had even a hurried,agitated air, which shewed impatience to be gone.
Anne knew not howto understand it.
She had the kindest "Good morning, God bless you!"
from Captain Harville, but from him not a word, nor a look!
He had passed out of the room without a look!
She had only time, however, to move closer to the table wherehe had been writing, when footsteps were heard returning;the door opened, it was himself.
He begged their pardon,but he had forgotten his gloves, and instantly crossing the roomto the writing table, he drew out a letter from under the scattered paper,placed it before Anne with eyes of glowing entreaty fixed on herfor a time, and hastily collecting his gloves, was again out of the room,almost before Mrs Musgrove was aware of his being in it:the work of an instant!
The revolution which one instant had made in Anne, was almostbeyond expression.
The letter, with a direction hardly legible,to "Miss A. E.--," was evidently the one which he had been foldingso hastily.
While supposed to be writing only to Captain Benwick,he had been also addressing her!
On the contents of that letterdepended all which this world could do for her.
Anything was possible,anything might be defied rather than suspense.
Mrs Musgrove hadlittle arrangements of her own at her own table; to their protectionshe must trust, and sinking into the chair which he had occupied,succeeding to the very spot where he had leaned and written,her eyes devoured the following words:"I can listen no longer in silence.
I must speak to you by such meansas are within my reach.
You pierce my soul.
I am half agony,half hope.
Tell me not that I am too late, that such precious feelingsare gone for ever.
I offer myself to you again with a hearteven more your own than when you almost broke it, eight yearsand a half ago.
Dare not say that man forgets sooner than  woman,that his love has an earlier death.
I have loved none but you.
Unjust I may have been, weak and resentful I have been,but never inconstant.
You alone have brought me to Bath.
For you alone, I think and plan.
Have you not seen this?
Can you fail to have understood my wishes?
I had not waited eventhese ten days, could I have read your feelings, as I think you must havepenetrated mine.
I can hardly write.
I am every instant hearingsomething which overpowers me.
You sink your voice, but I candistinguish the tones of that voice when they would be lost on others.
Too good, too excellent creature!
You do us justice, indeed.
You do believe that there is true attachment and constancy among men.
Believe it to be most fervent, most undeviating, in F. W."I must go, uncertain of my fate; but I shall return hither,or follow your party, as soon as possible.
A word, a look,will be enough to decide whether I enter your father's housethis evening or never."
Such a letter was not to be soon recovered from.
Half and hour's solitudeand reflection might have tranquillized her; but the ten minutes onlywhich now passed before she was interrupted, with all the restraintsof her situation, could do nothing towards tranquillity.
Every momentrather brought fresh agitation.
It was overpowering happiness.
And before she was beyond the first stage of full sensation,Charles, Mary, and Henrietta all came in.
The absolute necessity of seeming like herself produced thenan immediate struggle; but after a while she could do no more.
She began not to understand a word they said, and was obligedto plead indisposition and excuse herself.
They could then seethat she looked very ill, were shocked and concerned, and would notstir without her for the world.
This was dreadful.
Would they onlyhave gone away, and left her in the quiet possession of that roomit would have been her cure; but to have them all standing orwaiting around her was distracting, and in desperation,she said she would go home.
"By all means, my dear," cried Mrs Musgrove, "go home directly,and take care of yourself, that you may be fit for the evening.
I wish Sarah was here to doctor you, but I am no doctor myself.
Charles, ring and order a chair.
She must not walk."
But the chair would never do.
Worse than all!
To lose the possibilityof speaking two words to Captain Wentworth in the course of her quiet,solitary progress up the town (and she felt almost certain of meeting him)could not be borne.
The chair was earnestly protested against,and Mrs Musgrove, who thought only of one sort of illness,having assured herself with some anxiety, that there had been no fallin the case; that Anne had not at any time lately slipped down,and got a blow on her head; that she was perfectly convinced of havinghad no fall; could part with her cheerfully, and depend onfinding her better at night.
Anxious to omit no possible precaution, Anne struggled, and said--"I am afraid, ma'am, that it is not perfectly understood.
Pray be so good as to mention to the other gentlemen that we hopeto see your whole party this evening.
I am afraid there had beensome mistake; and I wish you particularly to assure Captain Harvilleand Captain Wentworth, that we hope to see them both."
"Oh!
my dear, it is quite understood, I give you my word.
Captain Harville has no thought but of going."
"Do you think so?
But I am afraid; and I should be so very sorry.
Will you promise me to mention it, when you see them again?
You will see them both this morning, I dare say.
Do promise me."
"To be sure I will, if you wish it.
Charles, if you see Captain Harvilleanywhere, remember to give Miss Anne's message.
But indeed, my dear,you need not be uneasy.
Captain Harville holds himself quite engaged,I'll answer for it; and Captain Wentworth the same, I dare say."
Anne could do no more; but her heart prophesied some mischanceto damp the perfection of her felicity.
It could not be very lasting,however.
Even if he did not come to Camden Place himself,it would be in her power to send an intelligible sentenceby Captain Harville.
Another momentary vexation occurred.
Charles, in his real concern and good nature, would go home with her;there was no preventing him.
This was almost cruel.
But she could notbe long ungrateful; he was sacrificing an engagement at a gunsmith's,to be of use to her; and she set off with him, with no feelingbut gratitude apparent.
They were on Union Street, when a quicker step behind, a somethingof familiar sound, gave her two moments' preparation for the sightof Captain Wentworth.
He joined them; but, as if irresolutewhether to join or to pass on, said nothing, only looked.
Anne could command herself enough to receive that look,and not repulsively.
The cheeks which had been pale now glowed,and the movements which had hesitated were decided.
He walked by her side.
Presently, struck by a sudden thought, Charles said--"Captain Wentworth, which way are you going?
Only to Gay Street,or farther up the town?"
"I hardly know," replied Captain Wentworth, surprised.
"Are you going as high as Belmont?
Are you going near Camden Place?
Because, if you are, I shall have no scruple in asking youto take my place, and give Anne your arm to her father's door.
She is rather done for this morning, and must not go so far without help,and I ought to be at that fellow's in the Market Place.
He promised me the sight of a capital gun he is just going to send off;said he would keep it unpacked to the last possible moment,that I might see it; and if I do not turn back now, I have no chance.
By his description, a good deal like the second size double-barrel of mine,which you shot with one day round Winthrop."
There could not be an objection.
There could be only the mostproper alacrity, a most obliging compliance for public view;and smiles reined in and spirits dancing in private rapture.
In half a minute Charles was at the bottom of Union Street again,and the other two proceeding together:  and soon words enough had passedbetween them to decide their direction towards the comparatively quietand retired gravel walk, where the power of conversation would makethe present hour a blessing indeed, and prepare it for allthe immortality which the happiest recollections of their own future livescould bestow.
There they exchanged again those feelingsand those promises which had once before seemed to secure everything,but which had been followed by so many, many years of divisionand estrangement.
There they returned again into the past,more exquisitely happy, perhaps, in their re-union, than whenit had been first projected; more tender, more tried, more fixedin a knowledge of each other's character, truth, and attachment;more equal to act, more justified in acting.
And there, as they slowlypaced the gradual ascent, heedless of every group around them,seeing neither sauntering politicians, bustling housekeepers,flirting girls, nor nursery-maids and children, they could indulge inthose retrospections and acknowledgements, and especially inthose explanations of what had directly preceded the present moment,which were so poignant and so ceaseless in interest.
All the littlevariations of the last week were gone through; and of yesterdayand today there could scarcely be an end.
She had not mistaken him.
Jealousy of Mr Elliot had beenthe retarding weight, the doubt, the torment.
That had begun to operatein the very hour of first meeting her in Bath; that had returned,after a short suspension, to ruin the concert; and that had influenced himin everything he had said and done, or omitted to say and do,in the last four-and-twenty hours.
It had been gradually yieldingto the better hopes which her looks, or words, or actionsoccasionally encouraged; it had been vanquished at last bythose sentiments and those tones which had reached him while she talkedwith Captain Harville; and under the irresistible governance of whichhe had seized a sheet of paper, and poured out his feelings.
Of what he had then written, nothing was to be retracted or qualified.
He persisted in having loved none but her.
She had never been supplanted.
He never even believed himself to see her equal.
Thus much indeedhe was obliged to acknowledge:  that he had been constant unconsciously,nay unintentionally; that he had meant to forget her, and believed itto be done.
He had imagined himself indifferent, when he had onlybeen angry; and he had been unjust to her merits, because he had beena sufferer from them.
Her character was now fixed on his mindas perfection itself, maintaining the loveliest medium of fortitudeand gentleness; but he was obliged to acknowledge that only at Uppercrosshad he learnt to do her justice, and only at Lyme had he begunto understand himself.
At Lyme, he had received lessonsof more than one sort.
The passing admiration of Mr Elliothad at least roused him, and the scenes on the Cobb and atCaptain Harville's had fixed her superiority.
In his preceding attempts to attach himself to Louisa Musgrove(the attempts of angry pride), he protested that he had for everfelt it to be impossible; that he had not cared, could not care,for Louisa; though till that day, till the leisure for reflectionwhich followed it, he had not understood the perfect excellenceof the mind with which Louisa's could so ill bear a comparison,or the perfect unrivalled hold it possessed over his own.
There, he had learnt to distinguish between the steadiness of principleand the obstinacy of self-will, between the darings of heedlessnessand the resolution of a collected mind.
There he had seen everythingto exalt in his estimation the woman he had lost; and there begunto deplore the pride, the folly, the madness of resentment,which had kept him from trying to regain her when thrown in his way.
From that period his penance had become severe.
He had no soonerbeen free from the horror and remorse attending the first few daysof Louisa's accident, no sooner begun to feel himself alive again,than he had begun to feel himself, though alive, not at liberty.
"I found," said he, "that I was considered by Harville an engaged man!
That neither Harville nor his wife entertained a doubt of ourmutual attachment.
I was startled and shocked.
To a degree,I could contradict this instantly; but, when I began to reflectthat others might have felt the same--her own family, nay,perhaps herself--I was no longer at my own disposal.
I was hers in honourif she wished it.
I had been unguarded.
I had not thought seriouslyon this subject before.
I had not considered that my excessive intimacymust have its danger of ill consequence in many ways; and that I hadno right to be trying whether I could attach myself to either of the girls,at the risk of raising even an unpleasant report, were there no otherill effects.
I had been grossly wrong, and must abide the consequences."
He found too late, in short, that he had entangled himself;and that precisely as he became fully satisfied of his not caringfor Louisa at all, he must regard himself as bound to her,if her sentiments for him were what the Harvilles supposed.
It determined him to leave Lyme, and await her complete recovery elsewhere.
He would gladly weaken, by any fair means, whatever feelings orspeculations concerning him might exist; and he went, therefore,to his brother's, meaning after a while to return to Kellynch,and act as circumstances might require.
"I was six weeks with Edward," said he, "and saw him happy.
I could have no other pleasure.
I deserved none.
He enquired after youvery particularly; asked even if you were personally altered,little suspecting that to my eye you could never alter."
Anne smiled, and let it pass.
It was too pleasing a blunderfor a reproach.
It is something for a woman to be assured,in her eight-and-twentieth year, that she has not lost one charmof earlier youth; but the value of such homage was inexpressibly increasedto Anne, by comparing it with former words, and feeling it to bethe result, not the cause of a revival of his warm attachment.
He had remained in Shropshire, lamenting the blindness of his own pride,and the blunders of his own calculations, till at once released from Louisaby the astonishing and felicitous intelligence of her engagementwith Benwick.
"Here," said he, "ended the worst of my state; for now I could at leastput myself in the way of happiness; I could exert myself;I could do something.
But to be waiting so long in inaction,and waiting only for evil, had been dreadful.
Within the firstfive minutes I said, `I will be at Bath on Wednesday,' and I was.
Was it unpardonable to think it worth my while to come?
and to arrivewith some degree of hope?
You were single.
It was possible thatyou might retain the feelings of the past, as I did; and one encouragementhappened to be mine.
I could never doubt that you would be loved andsought by others, but I knew to a certainty that you had refused one man,at least, of better pretensions than myself; and I could not helpoften saying, `Was this for me?'"
Their first meeting in Milsom Street afforded much to be said,but the concert still more.
That evening seemed to be made upof exquisite moments.
The moment of her stepping forwardin the Octagon Room to speak to him:  the moment of Mr Elliot's appearingand tearing her away, and one or two subsequent moments,marked by returning hope or increasing despondency, were dwelt onwith energy.
"To see you," cried he, "in the midst of those who could not bemy well-wishers; to see your cousin close by you, conversing and smiling,and feel all the horrible eligibilities and proprieties of the match!
To consider it as the certain wish of every being who could hopeto influence you!
Even if your own feelings were reluctant or indifferent,to consider what powerful supports would be his!
Was it not enoughto make the fool of me which I appeared?
How could I look onwithout agony?
Was not the very sight of the friend who sat behind you,was not the recollection of what had been, the knowledge of her influence,the indelible, immoveable impression of what persuasion had once done--was it not all against me?"
"You should have distinguished," replied Anne.
"You should not havesuspected me now; the case is so different, and my age is so different.
If I was wrong in yielding to persuasion once, remember thatit was to persuasion exerted on the side of safety, not of risk.
When I yielded, I thought it was to duty, but no duty could be calledin aid here.
In marrying a man indifferent to me, all riskwould have been incurred, and all duty violated."
"Perhaps I ought to have reasoned thus," he replied, "but I could not.
I could not derive benefit from the late knowledge I had acquiredof your character.
I could not bring it into play; it was overwhelmed,buried, lost in those earlier feelings which I had been smarting underyear after year.
I could think of you only as one who had yielded,who had given me up, who had been influenced by any one rather than by me.
I saw you with the very person who had guided you in that year of misery.
I had no reason to believe her of less authority now.
The force of habitwas to be added."
"I should have thought," said Anne, "that my manner to yourselfmight have spared you much or all of this."
"No, no!
your manner might be only the ease which your engagementto another man would give.
I left you in this belief; and yet,I was determined to see you again.
My spirits rallied with the morning,and I felt that I had still a motive for remaining here."
At last Anne was at home again, and happier than any one in that housecould have conceived.
All the surprise and suspense, and every otherpainful part of the morning dissipated by this conversation,she re-entered the house so happy as to be obliged to find an alloyin some momentary apprehensions of its being impossible to last.
An interval of meditation, serious and grateful, was the best correctiveof everything dangerous in such high-wrought felicity; and she wentto her room, and grew steadfast and fearless in the thankfulnessof her enjoyment.
The evening came, the drawing-rooms were lighted up, the company assembled.
It was but a card party, it was but a mixture of those who hadnever met before, and those who met too often; a commonplace business,too numerous for intimacy, too small for variety; but Anne had never foundan evening shorter.
Glowing and lovely in sensibility and happiness,and more generally admired than she thought about or cared for,she had cheerful or forbearing feelings for every creature around her.
Mr Elliot was there; she avoided, but she could pity him.
The Wallises, she had amusement in understanding them.
Lady Dalrympleand Miss Carteret--they would soon be innoxious cousins to her.
She cared not for Mrs Clay, and had nothing to blush for inthe public manners of her father and sister.
With the Musgroves,there was the happy chat of perfect ease; with Captain Harville,the kind-hearted intercourse of brother and sister; with Lady Russell,attempts at conversation, which a delicious consciousness cut short;with Admiral and Mrs Croft, everything of peculiar cordiality andfervent interest, which the same consciousness sought to conceal;and with Captain Wentworth, some moments of communicationscontinually occurring, and always the hope of more, and alwaysthe knowledge of his being there.
It was in one of these short meetings, each apparently occupiedin admiring a fine display of greenhouse plants, that she said--"I have been thinking over the past, and trying impartiallyto judge of the right and wrong, I mean with regard to myself;and I must believe that I was right, much as I suffered from it,that I was perfectly right in being guided by the friend whomyou will love better than you do now.
To me, she was in the placeof a parent.
Do not mistake me, however.
I am not sayingthat she did not err in her advice.
It was, perhaps, one of those casesin which advice is good or bad only as the event decides;and for myself, I certainly never should, in any circumstanceof tolerable similarity, give such advice.
But I mean, that I was rightin submitting to her, and that if I had done otherwise, I should havesuffered more in continuing the engagement than I did even in giving it up,because I should have suffered in my conscience.
I have now,as far as such a sentiment is allowable in human nature, nothingto reproach myself with; and if I mistake not, a strong sense of dutyis no bad part of a woman's portion."
He looked at her, looked at Lady Russell, and looking again at her,replied, as if in cool deliberation--"Not yet.
But there are hopes of her being forgiven in time.
I trust to being in charity with her soon.
But I too have beenthinking over the past, and a  question has suggested itself,whether there may not have been one person more my enemyeven than that lady?
My own self.
Tell me if, when I returnedto England in the year eight, with a few thousand pounds,and was posted into the Laconia, if I had then written to you,would you have answered my letter?
Would you, in short,have renewed the engagement then?"
"Would I!"
was all her answer; but the accent was decisive enough.
"Good God!"
he cried, "you would!
It is not that I did not think of it,or desire it, as what could alone crown all my other success;but I was proud, too proud to ask again.
I did not understand you.
I shut my eyes, and would not understand you, or do you justice.
This is a recollection which ought to make me forgive every onesooner than myself.
Six years of separation and sufferingmight have been spared.
It is a sort of pain, too, which is new to me.
I have been used to the gratification of believing myself to earnevery blessing that I enjoyed.
I have valued myself on honourable toilsand just rewards.
Like other great men under reverses," he added,with a smile.
"I must endeavour to subdue my mind to my fortune.
I must learn to brook being happier than I deserve."
Chapter 24Who can be in doubt of what followed?
When any two young peopletake it into their heads to marry, they are pretty sure by perseveranceto carry their point, be they ever so poor, or ever so imprudent,or ever so little likely to be necessary to each other's ultimate comfort.
This may be bad morality to conclude with, but I believe it to be truth;and if such parties succeed, how should a Captain Wentworth andan Anne Elliot, with the advantage of maturity of mind,consciousness of right, and one independent fortune between them,fail of bearing down every opposition?
They might in fact,have borne down a great deal more than they met with, for there waslittle to distress them beyond the want of graciousness and warmth.
Sir Walter made no objection, and Elizabeth did nothing worsethan look cold and unconcerned.
Captain Wentworth, with five-and-twentythousand pounds, and as high in his profession as merit and activitycould place him, was no longer nobody.
He was now esteemed quite worthyto address the daughter of a foolish, spendthrift baronet,who had not had principle or sense enough to maintain himselfin the situation in which Providence had placed him, and who couldgive his daughter at present but a small part of the shareof ten thousand pounds which must be hers hereafter.
Sir Walter, indeed, though he had no affection for Anne,and no vanity flattered, to make him really happy on the occasion,was very far from thinking it a bad match for her.
On the contrary,when he saw more of Captain Wentworth, saw him repeatedly by daylight,and eyed him well, he was very much struck by his personal claims,and felt that his superiority of appearance might be not unfairly balancedagainst her superiority of rank; and all this, assisted byhis well-sounding name, enabled Sir Walter at last to prepare his pen,with a very good grace, for the insertion of the marriagein the volume of honour.
The only one among them, whose opposition of feeling could exciteany serious anxiety was Lady Russell.
Anne knew that Lady Russellmust be suffering some pain in understanding and relinquishing Mr Elliot,and be making some struggles to become truly acquainted with,and do justice to Captain Wentworth.
This however was whatLady Russell had now to do.
She must learn to feel that she hadbeen mistaken with regard to both; that she had been unfairly influencedby appearances in each; that because Captain Wentworth's mannershad not suited her own ideas, she had been too quick in suspecting themto indicate a character of dangerous impetuosity; and that becauseMr Elliot's manners had precisely pleased her in their proprietyand correctness, their general politeness and suavity, she had beentoo quick in receiving them as the certain result of the most correctopinions and well-regulated mind.
There was nothing lessfor Lady Russell to do, than to admit that she had beenpretty completely wrong, and to take up a new set of opinionsand of hopes.
There is a quickness of perception in some, a nicety in the discernmentof character, a natural penetration, in short, which no experiencein others can equal, and Lady Russell had been less giftedin this part of understanding than her young friend.
But she wasa very good woman, and if her second object was to be sensibleand well-judging, her first was to see Anne happy.
She loved Annebetter than she loved her own abilities; and when the awkwardnessof the beginning was over, found little hardship in attaching herselfas a mother to the man who was securing the happiness of her other child.
Of all the family, Mary was probably the one most immediately gratifiedby the circumstance.
It was creditable to have a sister married,and she might flatter herself with having been greatly instrumentalto the connexion, by keeping Anne with her in the autumn;and as her own sister must be better than her husband's sisters,it was very agreeable that Captain Wentworth should be a richer man thaneither Captain Benwick or Charles Hayter.
She had something to suffer,perhaps, when they came into contact again, in seeing Anne restoredto the rights of seniority, and the mistress of a very pretty landaulette;but she had a future to look forward to, of powerful consolation.
Anne had no Uppercross Hall before her, no landed estate,no headship of a family; and if they could but keep Captain Wentworthfrom being made a baronet, she would not change situations with Anne.
It would be well for the eldest sister if she were equally satisfiedwith her situation, for a change is not very probable there.
She had soon the mortification of seeing Mr Elliot withdraw,and no one of proper condition has since presented himself to raiseeven the unfounded hopes which sunk with him.
The news of his cousins Anne's engagement burst on Mr Elliotmost unexpectedly.
It deranged his best plan of domestic happiness,his best hope of keeping Sir Walter single by the watchfulnesswhich a son-in-law's rights would have given.
But, though discomfitedand disappointed, he could still do something for his own interestand his own enjoyment.
He soon quitted Bath; and on Mrs Clay'squitting it soon afterwards, and being next heard of as establishedunder his protection in London, it was evident how double a gamehe had been playing, and how determined he was to save himselffrom being cut out by one artful woman, at least.
Mrs Clay's affections had overpowered her interest, and she had sacrificed,for the young man's sake, the possibility of scheming longerfor Sir Walter.
She has abilities, however, as well as affections;and it is now a doubtful point whether his cunning, or hers,may finally carry the day; whether, after preventing her from beingthe wife of Sir Walter, he may not be wheedled and caressed at lastinto making her the wife of Sir William.
It cannot be doubted that Sir Walter and Elizabeth were shockedand mortified by the loss of their companion, and the discovery oftheir deception in her.
They had their great cousins, to be sure,to resort to for comfort; but they must long feel that to flatterand follow others, without being flattered and followed in turn,is but a state of half enjoyment.
Anne, satisfied at a very early period of Lady Russell's meaningto love Captain Wentworth as she ought, had no other alloyto the happiness of her prospects than what arose from the consciousnessof having no relations to bestow on him which a man of sense could value.
There she felt her own inferiority very keenly.
The disproportionin their fortune was nothing; it did not give her a moment's regret;but to have no family to receive and estimate him properly,nothing of respectability, of harmony, of good will to offerin return for all the worth and all the prompt welcome which met herin his brothers and sisters, was a source of as lively painas her mind could well be sensible of under circumstances of otherwisestrong felicity.
She had but two friends in the world to add to his list,Lady Russell and Mrs Smith.
To those, however, he was very well disposedto attach himself.
Lady Russell, in spite of all her former transgressions,he could now value from his heart.
While he was not obliged to saythat he believed her to have been right in originally dividing them,he was ready to say almost everything else in her favour,and as for Mrs Smith, she had claims of various kinds to recommend herquickly and permanently.
Her recent good offices by Anne had been enough in themselves,and their marriage, instead of depriving her of one friend,secured her two.
She was their earliest visitor in their settled life;and Captain Wentworth, by putting her in the way of recoveringher husband's property in the West Indies, by writing for her,acting for her, and seeing her through all the petty difficultiesof the case with the activity and exertion of a fearless manand a determined friend, fully requited the services whichshe had rendered, or ever meant to render, to his wife.
Mrs Smith's enjoyments were not spoiled by this improvement of income,with some improvement of health, and the acquisition of such friendsto be often with, for her cheerfulness and mental alacrity did notfail her; and while these prime supplies of good remained, she might havebid defiance even to greater accessions of worldly prosperity.
She might have been absolutely rich and perfectly healthy,and yet be happy.
Her spring of felicity was in the glowof her spirits, as her friend Anne's was in the warmth of her heart.
Anne was tenderness itself, and she had the full worth of itin Captain Wentworth's affection.
His profession was all that could evermake her friends wish that tenderness less, the dread of a future warall that could dim her sunshine.
She gloried in being a sailor's wife,but she must pay the tax of quick alarm for belonging to that professionwhich is, if possible, more distinguished in its domestic virtuesthan in its national importance.
Finis
